NEW PATRIOTIC PARTY
DEVELOPMENT IN FREEDOM

NEW PATRIOTIC PARTY (NPP)
MANIFESTO FOR ELECTION 2016

CHANGE

AN AGENDA FOR JOBS

Creating Prosperity &
Equal Opportunity for All

(The party’s) policy is to liberate energies of people for growth of a property owning democracy in this land, with right to life, freedom  justice, as principles to which Government  laws of land should be dedicated in order specifically to enrich life, property  liberty of each  every citizen.

Dr. J. B. Danquah

My Vision for Ghana

Our nation is in crisis: a crisis created  sustained by mismanagement, incompetence  corruption of Mahama-led National Democratic  Congress (NDC) government. Economic conditions are worsening by day  there is so much suffering in land. But Ghana does not have to be like this. Ghana deserves best!

I have dedicated my life to public service to change Ghana for good. As President, with help of Almighty God, I will be committed to a different kind of government, one that governs in national interest, not for private gain.


As I travel country over years, I see pain  sacrifices made by ordinary Ghanaians everyday:

* by farmer who struggles to feed his family  send his children to school, but does not know, whether having made that sacrifice to
pay bills, his children will even be able to get a job at end of their studies.

* by mother of sick child, who has to walk miles on dusty road to clinic to get medicine only to be turned away because clinic will not accept her NHIS card  she has no money to pay.

* by young man  woman who, through no fault of their own, have had to drop out of school  cannot find a way out of life’s
difficulties.

* by young man who, because of financial circumstances at home, never had opportunity to go to school  is now sleeping rough on streets of Accra.

* by youth who have worked hard at school, or University, but still cannot find a job when they leave. They become street hawkers  even open roadside shops, but find they struggle to survive because falling cedi raises costs of their goods. Their shops also close because they cannot afford electricity bills.

* by husband with a family of four who lost his job two years ago, because his employers had to close down business due to DUMSOR  high cost of operations.

* by that young woman whose wages can barely cover her transport fares to    work  her share of one bedroom she shares with her friend, and

* by kayayei who have no opportunities or shelter  are forced to sleep on streets of our cities.

It is for these people that I am running for President - for ordinary Ghanaians who have been betrayed by a government that does not care. It is to them that my Government will be dedicated.

My vision for Ghana is of an optimistic, self-confident  prosperous nation with a strong  thriving democratic society in which mutual trust  economic opportunities exist for all, irrespective of their background.

The next New Patriotic Party (NPP) government will place people at its centre. Their hopes  their concerns will drive its policies  priorities.
I promise to build a Ghana that works  gives each  every one of us opportunity to improve our lives. A Ghana that works for us  our families, not just for rich  powerful.
I will be a President for all Ghanaians. Whatever your region, your tribe, your gender, your status, or your religion, I will serve you all.
I will champion your cause with help of Almighty God,  every day I wake up as President, my first  only consideration will be what is best for country we all love  what will improve lives of all our people.
I have an unshakeable faith that our country, Black Star of Africa, under leadership of NPP, has a bright future, a future that will be secured by enterprise, creativity,  hard work of Ghanaian people.
Join me, so together, we can build a country where, if you show up, step up,  work hard, you will have your fair share of its wealth,  be fairly rewarded for your hard work. A country in which hard work pays,  cutting corners does not. A country in which, no matter where you come from, you will be rewarded based on merit, not on whom-you-know-basis. A country in which every young person can hope,  aspire,  reach his or her fullest potential, right here in Ghana.

Nana Addo Dankwa Akufo-Addo


Chairman’s Remarks

Ghana, our dear country, is at crossroads. We find ourselves in a messy economic  social crisis.
About eight years ago, no one would have imagined that Ghana could slip down this much   being one of fastest growing economies in world to a highly indebted  a highly distressed country.
Ghana, under NPP government led by President J. A. Kufuor, moved   a highly indebted poor country to a middle income country as at 2008.
The question is, what could have gone so wrong to bring us to our current state or situation?
We are honestly convinced  strongly insist that this is due to mismanagement, incompetence  corruption of Mahama-led NDC government.
On December 7, 2016, people of Ghana will have an opportunity to end many years of hardship under Mahama-led NDC Government  elect Nana Addo Dankwa Akufo-Addo as next president of Ghana.
There is HOPE for Ghana. Under presidency of Nana Addo Dankwa Akufo-Addo, Ghana will rise again,  be on right path towards economic prosperity, good  accountable governance in a stable  a democratic environment.

This manifesto for CHANGE is a blueprint for lifting country   abyss,  reversing misfortunes of NDC government under John
Mahama.
It is my humble duty as Acting National Chairman of NPP, to call on all Ghanaians to vote for Nana Addo Dankwa Akufo Addo for President in the
2016 elections.

May God bless Ghana,  us all.

Thank you.

Freddie Blay
National Chairman (Ag.)

NEW PATRIOTIC PARTY
DEVELOPMENT IN FREEDOM
Chapter 1: A Strong Economy Matters 1
Chapter 2: Trade  Industry 21
Chapter 3: Energy  Petroleum 35
Chapter 4: Agriculture  Rural Development 47
Chapter 5: Growing Together 59
Chapter 6: Infrastructure 69
Chapter 7: Natural Resources - Land, Forestry  Mining 87
Chapter 8: Science, Technology, Innovation  Environment 95
Chapter 9: Education 101
Chapter 10: Health 113
Chapter 11: Social Development 123
Chapter 12: Governance, Corruption  Public Accountability 131
Chapter 13: Local Goverment 139
Chapter 14: Security 145
Chapter 15: Foreign Affairs 155
Chapter 16: Youth  Sports 161
Chapter 17: Tourism, Culture  Creative Arts 167
Chapter 18: Chieftaincy, Religious Affairs  Civil Society 173

Chapter 1
NEW PATRIOTIC PARTY
DEVELOPMENT IN FREEDOM
A STRONG ECONOMY MATTERS

A strong economy creates opportunities,  inspires more people to start new businesses. In much same way, a strong economy encourages existing businesses to make new investments, to grow,  expand. More  well-paying jobs are created, private sector hires more people,  citizens prosper. Public sector-driven job creation interventions  initiatives also require a strong economy.
Social services such as National Health Insurance Scheme, free quality basic schools across every part of country, School Feeding Programme, good roads  a wider  cheaper transport network, affordable housing, stable  affordable electric power: all of these require a strong economy.
Supported by a good business environment, a strong economy is defined by its stability, its growth rate, levels  number of taxes, extent of value-addition, creation of wealth,  prosperity of citizens.
Having jobs  livelihoods provide security for individuals, families  communities as a whole. When people prosper, peace is largely secured.
Unfortunately, economy is broken: there is widespread hardship  suffering, resulting in insecurity at all levels.
This is because John Mahama has been a bad steward of economy  our finances. Seven out of every ten Ghanaians say John Mahama has failed on economy,  is leading country in wrong direction.

I. A RECORD OF PERFORMANCE

Under 8 years of NPP government,   2001 to 2008, taxes  loans amounted to GH¢20 billion. In contrast, taxes, oil revenues,
and loans over 8-year period of 2009-2016 under NDC would amount to some GH¢248 billion. NDC government would have had,
in eight years, more than 12 times nominal resources that NPP had (Figure 1).

The question that Ghanaians should be asking is; how has management of huge resources at disposal of Mahama-led NDC government impacted on economy?

Real Sector Developments

1. Between December 2000  December 2008, without oil, economic growth increased   3.7% to 9.1%. After declining to 4.8% in 2009, real GDP growth increased to 7.7% in 2010  14% in 2011 following onset of oil production. Since 2011 however, real GDP growth has declined steadily  drastically to 3.9% in 2015 (Figure 2), basically growth rate Ghana attained in year 2000 which was 3.7%. President Mahama’s tenure of office has been characterized by declining economic growth.

2. Between 2000  2008 (following rebasing of GDP), size of country's economy increased   some $5.1 billion to $28.5 billion, a 459% increase in eight years (Figure 3). Even in face of a global economic  financial crisis in 2007/8 (with oil prices reaching a record high of $147 per barrel), economic growth in 2008 rose to 9.1%. However, Ghana’s GDP, notwithstanding discovery of oil, has only increased   $28.5 billion in 2008 to a projected $40 billion in 2016 (a 40% increase in eight years). However, between 2012  2016 i.e. during John Mahama’s tenure as president, economy, in dollar terms, shrunk by 5%.

3. Under NDC, GDP per capita has recorded a growth of 17% (from $1,266 in 2008 to a projected $1,481 in 2016) with oil revenues. Under John Mahama’s tenure as president (2012-2016), GDP per capita has declined by 12%. Under NPP on other hand, GDP per capita recorded a growth of 187% in 8 years (from $440 to $1,266) without oil revenues. While NPP increased per capita incomes by $826 during its term, NDC, with twelve times more resources, has increased per capita incomes by only $215 (Figure 4). With twelve times less resources, NPP increased GDP per capita by some four times more than NDC. This is essentially difference between competent economic management  incompetent economic management. It also tells us that fundamentally, country’s problem is not about resources. Our problem is mismanagement, incompetent  corrupt use of our resources

4. In dollar terms, under NDC, minimum wage declined   $2.12 to $2.02 by 2016 (i.e. 4.6%). Between 2012  2016 (during tenure of President Mahama), minimum wage in dollar terms declined by 23.6%! (Figure 5). In comparison, NPP increased minimum wage   equivalent of $0.62 in 2000 to $2.12 in 2008 (i.e. by 244%).

5. Furthermore, data shows that, as national income increased under President John Agyekum Kufuor in 2001-2008 period, people at bottom of income scale became better off. In 2009-2016 period, however, as income increased, those at bottom of income scale have become worse off. While income inequality, as measured by change in minimum wage relative to change in national income, improved by 1.8% during 2001 to 2008 period, it has seen a major decline since 2008, with worst decline (-5%) occurring during John Mahama’s tenure as President (Figure 6)

6. According to United Nations Human Development Index (a measure of progress in income, literacy  life expectancy), for period 2000-2014, Ghana made most progress in human development between 2000  2010. average growth rates of Ghana’s UNDP Human Development Index has declined   1.33 (between 2000-2010) to 1.13 (between 2010-2014).

7. country’s food import bill has increased dramatically   US$600 million in 2008 to $2.1 billion in 2015 (Figure 7). Rice imports, for example, have risen by 52%   395,400 metric tonnes in 2008 to over 600,000 metric tonnes in 2015.

8. agricultural extension service is on its knees with inadequate personnel  resources. There has been a freeze on hiring of Extension Officers under Mahama government.

9. mass cocoa spraying exercise, introduced by NPP government, has collapsed  cocoa production has subsequently declined. Under NPP, cocoa production more than doubled in just two years,   341,000 metric tonnes in 2001/2002 season to 737,000 metric tonnes by 2003/2004;  then to one million metric tonnes in 2010/2011. It has since declined to less than 750,000 metric tonnes in 2014/2015 season.

10. For primarily financial reasons, economy has had to endure five years of power outages (DUMSOR), with deeply debilitating consequences for economy. government is financially strapped  unable to meet its obligations to suppliers of gas   Nigeria, for example.

11. Electricity tariffs, thanks to high taxes  corrupt procurement of power generation, are now amongst highest in world.

12. In 8 years of NPP (2001-2008), average fiscal deficit as a percentage of GDP was 4.4%. In last seven years (2009-2015), fiscal deficit has averaged 8.1%, with three successive years of double digit deficits between 2012-2014 (the first time in our history).

13. total debt of country, after 51 years of independence,  at time NPP left office in 2008, was GH¢9.5 billion. Under NDC, in just seven years, it has risen to GH¢100 billion in 2015
(moving debt to GDP ratio   32% in 2008 to over 72% in 2015).

14. According to Managing Director of International Monetary Fund (IMF), most of country’s borrowing under Mahama government has been spent on consumption, rather than investment. In fact, only 20% of total government borrowing between 2009  2015 has been spent on infrastructure investment.

15. At end of 2008, country’s total annual interest payments amounted to GH¢680 million, but this has increased to GH¢10.5 billion in 2016. Six times country’s oil revenue is now needed to pay one year’s interest on debt.

16. After 8 years of mismanagement, banking system has been pushed to dangerously fragile levels. Rising state-owned enterprise (SOE) debts, debts owed by government to bulk oil distribution companies (BDCs),  inadequate supervision of microfinance companies have escalated level of nonperforming loans (NPLs) to as high as 19.3% in May 2016.

17. Lending rates of financial institutions have increased   27% in 2008 to 34% in 2016. days when banks chased customers with loans have disappeared. Today, banks prefer to lend to government,  not to private sector.

18. exchange rate, which stood at GH¢1.20 to US$1 at end of 2008, has dramatically depreciated to GH¢4.0 to US$1 today. Over period of NDC management of country’s economy, cedi has been one of worst performing currencies in world.

19. Teacher training allowances have been cancelled.

20. Nursing training allowances have been cancelled.

21. Nurses  health assistants are not being posted after completion of their courses.

22. Drivers  transport operators have experienced a dramatic rise in costs of insurance, spare parts, license fees, DVLA
charges  fuel.

23. Taxes on businesses have increased dramatically  new taxes have been introduced. For example, increases in capital gains tax (from 10% to 25%), withholding tax (from 15% to 20%)  introduction of Energy Levy (10%), VAT on Electricity (17.5%), VAT on Financial Services (17.5%),  Special Import Levy. Taxes have also been introduced on ambulances  bicycles.

24. Government expenditure on infrastructure has declined considerably   an average of 11.5% GDP between 2001  2008 to 5.7% of GDP between 2009  2015. 2016 expenditure on infrastructure is even lower at 4.2% of GDP.

25. Economic mismanagement has resulted in country turning to IMF for a bailout  to restore policy credibility. However, IMF programme has not delivered.

26. country’s sovereign credit rating has been downgraded   B+ (with a positive outlook), without oil, under NPP in 2008 to B- (with a stable outlook) in 2016, with oil, under NDC. This has resulted in government having to borrow at much higher cost.

27. NHIS has virtually collapsed. dreaded cash  carry system has returned.

28. free maternal care system has also collapsed.

II. IMPACT OF NDC’S MISMANAGEMENT, INCOMPETENCE  CORRUPTION ON WELFARE OF GHANAIANS

For majority of Ghanaians, results of Mahama-led NDC government’s mismanagement of economy has been a worsening of their living conditions  economic circumstances. Most people have looked on in dismay at corruption of Mahama government through schemes such as judgement debts, SADA, GYEEDA, Smartyy’s bus branding, emergency power plants like KARPOWER  AMERI,  sole sourcing. For vast majority of Ghanaians, toxic mixture of Mahama government’s mismanagement, incompetence  corruption over last eight years has resulted in an explosion of suffering in country:

* teachers are suffering
* teacher trainees are suffering
* nurses are suffering
* nursing trainees are suffering
* patients are suffering
* students are suffering
* traders are suffering
* pensioners are suffering
* drivers are suffering
* contractors are suffering
* civil servants are suffering
* farmers are suffering
* fishermen are suffering
* industries are suffering
* artisans are suffering
* kayayei are suffering
* men are suffering
* women are suffering
* children are crying
* Ghanaians are suffering

The discovery of oil has not made any difference in lives of most Ghanaians, except for a small group of friends  family around President. country is clearly not working. Mahama-led NDC government is not working  has no clue about how to get our country to work.

III. NPP’S VISION FOR GHANA

Our overall vision for Ghana is development of an optimistic, self-confident  prosperous nation, through creative exploitation of our human  natural resources, operating within a democratic, open  fair society in which mutual trust  economic opportunities exist for all.

We will build a democratic, open  fair society with following characteristics:

i. a prosperous population with a high quality of life.

ii. a stable, peaceful  firmly united nation.

iii. an efficient machinery of good governance with strong institutions.

iv. a well-educated population that strives for excellence, and

v. a competitive economy that is capable of producing sustainable growth, jobs  shared benefits for all.

IV. NPP’S ECONOMIC POLICY OBJECTIVES

On economy, our goal is simple: to build most business-friendly  people-friendly economy in Africa, which will create jobs  prosperity for all Ghanaians.
We will ensure that growth is socially responsible, diversified, spread geographically, comes   genuine value addition, environmentally sensitive  fair to all participants in economy, including labour.
To accomplish this, we will focus on growing economy  creating wealth  prosperity for vast majority of Ghanaians through private sector empowerment.
Our goal, inter alia, is to achieve double digit GDP growth annually for next four years (under Kufuor-led NPP government economy attained a GDP growth rate of 9.1% in 2008 without oil). We will reduce cost of doing business, maintain fiscal discipline, reduce government borrowing  reduce interest rates to spur private sector investment.
Our economic programme will enhance agricultural production  productivity, along with a transformation of economy through value addition to our raw materials in a process of rapid industrialization.
There will be an increase in infrastructure expenditure as a percentage of GDP to eliminate critical bottlenecks in areas of roads, rail, aviation, water, sanitation,  energy,  we will distribute infrastructure fairly  comprehensively across all parts of country.
The NPP will invest in our people through provision of quality education  healthcare, as well as affordable housing. role of government would be one of providing an enabling environment for private sector to thrive, as well as putting in place social policies to protect disadvantaged  vulnerable in society.
In particular, NPP will implement policies to invest in rural, coastal, zongo  inner city communities.
We understand that solid  consistent implementation of structural reforms  policies is ultimately key to successful job creation  therefore NPP will implement prudent  sustainable economic policies.
Our government will secure peace  stability of our nation.

V. NPP’S ECONOMIC POLICY DIRECTION

To achieve our objectives, our principal economic policy direction will be to:

a. restore macroeconomic stability

b. shift focus of economic management   taxation to production

c. manage economy competently, and

d. make machinery of government work to deliver benefits of progress to Ghanaians.

a. Restoring Macroeconomic Stability

The NPP will restore  maintain macroeconomic stability through pursuit of sound policies on basis of an enhanced institutional framework. Macroeconomic stability is built around three pillars: monetary discipline, fiscal discipline  financial stability. To reinforce monetary discipline, Bank of Ghana Act, 2002 (Act 612) established Monetary Policy Committee (MPC) to guide implementation of monetary policy. other two pillars (fiscal discipline  financial stability) have no such institutional anchors.

Enhancing Fiscal Discipline

Fiscal indiscipline has been bane of economic management in country. To address this, IMF recently insisted on passage of a Public Financial Management Act. However, law, as enacted, is woefully inadequate, because it lacks key elements that will protect public purse   abuse. Fiscal policy implementation, as it stands now, lacks three basic elements; absence of a transparent institutional arrangement for providing quality fiscal information to public, absence of a mechanism for ensuring accountability in implementing optimal fiscal policies to guarantee stability of system,  absence of an institution to ensure credibility of fiscal projections provided by Government.
To address problem of current high public debt levels  country’s high risk of debt distress, an NPP government will adopt  implement rules to anchor fiscal policy implementation. For example, there will be specific targets for reduction of government borrowing  debt.
In this regard, an NPP government will enact a Fiscal Responsibility Law (FRL) to bring comprehensiveness, accountability, transparency  stability to entire budgetary process. Under this law, a Fiscal Council would be established to contribute to accountability of Government, responsible for setting up medium-term fiscal policy anchors to guide fiscal policy as well as monitor compliance.

Enhancing Financial Stability

In this year’s State of Nation Address, President John Mahama attributed problems emanating   collapse of microfinance institutions, like DKM  God is Love, to a failure of banking supervision.
From what we know today, this is only tip of iceberg. banking sector has been highly exposed to debt   BDCs, energy sector debts,  non-performing private sector loans. As a result, at least 8 banks in country are on verge of collapse if something is not done urgently. financial stability pillar of macroeconomic framework has been weakened under NDC government. To address this over long term, NPP will establish a Financial Stability Council (akin to proposed Fiscal Council) that is well grounded in law. Its mandate, among others, will include assessing vulnerabilities affecting stability of financial system.

In addition,to restore overall macroeconomic stability, NPP will:

i. undertake financial sector reform to deepen financial markets, promote financial inclusion, enhance supervision  regulation of financial institutions  move country’s payment system away   a predominantly cash towards an electronic payments system

ii. implement a strategy aimed at repositioning country as an International Financial Services Centre (IFSC), like Mauritius, within region to create jobs

iii. formalize economy through establishment of a national database, using National Identification System as primary identifier, with linkages to databases of institutions such as Police, National Health Insurance Scheme (NHIS), Passport Office, Immigration, Courts, Ghana Revenue Authority (GRA),  Driver  Vehicle Licensing Authority (DVLA), and

iv. stabilize currency exchange rate for long term through prudent  disciplined macroeconomic management, an increase in domestic production,  an increase in exports. In addition, there would be a reinforcement of section 40 of Bank of Ghana Act, 2002 (Act 612) by keeping relatively stable, ratio between currency in circulation  foreign exchange cover.


b. Shifting Focus of Economic Management from
Taxation to Production

The mismanagement of economy under Mahama-led NDC government has resulted in an increase in taxes on virtually everything taxable. This has increased burden on private sector  has become a disincentive for production.

To address these challenges, NPP will shift focus of economic policy away   taxation to production by:

i. reducing corporate tax rate   25% to 20%

ii. removing import duties on raw materials  machinery for production within context of ECOWAS Common External Tariff (CET) Protocol

iii. abolishing Special Import Levy

iv. abolishing 17.5% VAT on imported medicines not produced in country

v. abolishing 17.5% VAT on Financial Services

vi. abolishing 5% VAT on Real Estate sales

vii. abolishing 17.5% VAT on domestic airline tickets

viii. reducing VAT for micro  small enterprises   current 17.5% to 3% Flat Rate VAT introduced by Kufuor-led NPP
government

ix. introducing tax credits  other incentives for businesses that hire young graduates   tertiary institutions, and

x. reviewing withholding taxes imposed on various sectors (including mining sector) that have constrained liquidity of many businesses

The ensuing increase in production  economic growth, arising   a streamlining as well as elimination  reduction of some of these taxes, will more than compensate for any temporary revenue shortfall.
Growth is expected to increase to double digits starting 2017. Indeed, during NPP tenure between 2001  2008, corporate taxes were
slashed   32% to 25%  tax revenue actually increased! data shows that, notwithstanding (or because of) high level of taxes, there
is a revenue shortfall of GH¢700 million for first half of 2016.
Additional sources of revenue,  therefore fiscal space to finance these tax reductions will include:

i. broadening of tax base as a result of formalization of economy

ii. increase in tax compliance

iii. reduced government expenditure as a result of increased collaboration with private sector  prioritization of government expenditure

iv. savings   reduction of interest rates paid on country’s debt stock

v. increase in oil  gas revenues   TEN  SANKOFA fields

vi. elimination of corruption, especially in procurement of goods  services, which is estimated at about 1.5% of GDP annually, and

vii. plugging leakages in administration of public finances.

The Auditor General’s Report has indicated that between 2012  2014, GH¢5.9 billion of government funds cannot be accounted for.
Collectively, these measures will more than exceed any revenue shortfall   reduction in taxes.

c. Competent Management of Economy

The NPP has a solid record of economic management, including growing economy, holding down debt judicious use of public finances while displaying a high sense of fiscal responsibility.
The first transformation Ghanaians will therefore witness under next NPP government, after 2016 elections, is transformation   mismanagement, incompetence  corruption under Mahama-led NDC government to prudent management, competence,  integrity under an NPP government.

d. A Government Machinery that Works

Under Mahama-led NDC government, quality of service delivery across all levels have broken down. Ordinary Ghanaians encounter deep frustrations  needless obstacles attempting to access public services   government agencies  institutions, including acquiring driving licences, acquiring passports, registering businesses, processing pension payments, processing payrolls for new teachers, nurses, doctors,  police officers,  land document registrations.
The NPP believes that purpose of Government is to help improve our lives, that of our families,  our communities,  an inefficient government machinery defeats this purpose, no matter investments government allegedly makes in infrastructure.
In this direction, in addition to managing economy competently, NPP will immediately deploy resources, both in equipment  personnel, in fixing basics of government machinery in order to deliver standardised services at affordable, transparent prices, faster turnaround times,  with professional handling of exceptions  grievances.

In sum, we will make Ghana work again.



Chapter 2

TRADE  INDUSTRY
NEW PATRIOTIC PARTY
DEVELOPMENT IN FREEDOM

Unemployment today has reached unprecedented levels under John Mahama. Millions of Ghanaians wake up each day to soul-destroying reality of joblessness  they spend their energies looking for nonexistent jobs. Young people complete school, acquire qualifications  end up frustrated, with no prospects of a job or a career. Young people, who have had to drop out of school, are unable to acquire skills or a profession, or even when complete schooling, cannot find work nor start a business because they are unable to find help.
The job market, including that for even skilled professions like teaching  nursing, which, under NPP, had readily available jobs, have been hit hard as a result of mismanagement, incompetence  corruption of Mahama-led NDC government.
Since job creation, for us in NPP, is essentially a private sector activity, number one priority for next NPP government will be to put in place policy framework that will help businesses expand  create jobs, as well as promote growth of entrepreneurship opportunities for young Ghanaians in particular.
The agenda for job creation would be underpinned by, among others, following:

a. pursuing aggressive industrialization  value-addition to agricultural produce

b. providing tax  related incentives for manufacturing businesses in sectors such as agro-processing, light industries, pharmaceuticals, petrochemicals, garments  textiles, among others

c. providing a reliable  cost effective mix of energy supply for businesses

d. providing necessary incentives for private sector participation in health service delivery

e. pursuing policies that will reduce interest rates

f. implementing policies that will reduce cost of doing business

g. stabilizing currency

h. providing incentives to hospitality  creative industries that will enable them create jobs

i. investing in skills training  apprenticeships, and

j. promoting exports, especially of value-added agricultural produce  light manufactures.

The country’s industrial sector faces significant challenges, principal ones of which are lack of access to finance, high interest rates, inadequate  poor quality raw materials for industrial processing, poorly developed domestic trade, weak consumer protection, lack of effective collaboration between research institutions  industry, poor trade facilitation, an unstable exchange rate, lack of coherent industrial development planning  initiatives, poor research  development
support scheme for industry, lack of land for industrial zones, high import duties on raw materials, poor standards of certification,  an unreliable  expensive power source.
Our strategy is to address these challenges in ways that enable industry to thrive  become a major source of jobs, especially for youth.

I. BUSINESS FINANCING

The challenges of raising finance for businesses in country include;

a. high cost of capital: interest rates hovers around 34%pa

b. inadequate medium-to-long term financing  venture capital funding, and

c. inadequate credit financing for SMEs

To address these challenges, NPP will:

a. refocus National Investment Bank (NIB) to provide finance for industrial sector

b. establish an Industrial Development Fund (IDF) to finance critical private sector industrial initiatives. Fund will be seeded  fed by funding   Government, multilateral  private
institutional investors

c. realign focus of Ghana Investment Promotion Centre (GIPC) to attract financing  investments into selected strategic
industries, and

d. eliminate current system of political patronage  restructure existing state-sponsored microfinance schemes such
as MASLOC to provide credit for SMEs, while strengthening oversight responsibilities over privately-financed micro finance institutions.

II. COST OF DOING BUSINESS

Businesses face a high cost of doing business as a result of:

a. high cost of production  running of businesses in general

b. high cost of utilities such as electricity, water,  communications

c. high taxes, fees,  other charges

To address these challenges, NPP will reduce tax burden on businesses, including on imported raw materials  machinery for
production  on utilities.

III. EXPORT DEVELOPMENT

A key challenge to export development is lack of a clear national implementation plan for export diversification  development.

To address this challenge, NPP will:

a. develop  implement a comprehensive, project-based export diversification action plan based on national export strategy

b. restructure operations of Ghana Export Promotion Authority (GEPA) to enhance export diversification to take advantage of EPA, AGOA,  Intra African Trade, and

c. provide support for organisations such as Association of Ghana Industries (AGI), Ghana Exporters Association (GEA),  Ghana Chamber of Commerce (GCC) for export promotion
activities.

IV. ENERGY FOR INDUSTRY

By far one of biggest challenges industries  businesses have faced for more than five years is inadequate supply of power due to:

a. unreliable  unstable power supply for industrial production, otherwise known as DUMSOR

b. inadequate, industry-targeted power supply polices, and

c. high cost of energy across board for industries  businesses.

The NPP will address these challenges by undertaking following
measures:

a. solve DUMSOR, current unreliable electricity supply crisis

b. re-orient energy tariff policy to reduce burden on businesses

c. promote supply of energy in support of production-related activities

d. create dedicated quality  reliable energy supply sources for industrial enclaves  zones

e. provide incentive schemes for development of specific renewable energy projects for industrial development, and

f. reduce significantly operational inefficiencies in energy supply  distribution.

Chapter 3 of this manifesto provides, in detail, our energy sector solutions.

V. ENTREPRENEURSHIP  BUSINESS DEVELOPMENT

Businesses also face challenges of:

a. inadequate public support for entrepreneurs, especially in Small  Medium-Scale Enterprises (SME) sector as well as start-ups, and

b. poor management of entrepreneurship training infrastructure  facilities.

To address these challenges, NPP will:

a. launch a comprehensive National Plan for Entrepreneurship  Innovation that will invest in supporting young businesses  start-ups, and

b. merge National Board for Small Scale Industries (NBSSI)  Rural Enterprises Project (REP) to consolidate public resources in provision of entrepreneurship training  business
development services.

VI. RAW MATERIALS FOR INDUSTRY

Inadequate  poor quality raw materials for industrial processing is one of key challenges industries face. To address these, NPP will:

a. provide specific incentives for production  supply of quality, locally-produced non-agricultural raw materials for industry at competitive prices, and

b. provide a comprehensive programme of support for cultivation of selected agricultural products as raw materials for agro-processing, including tomato, cassava, cocoa, soya beans, maize, oil palm, cashew, cotton, sheanut, selected fruits, groundnuts  rice.

VII. R&D FOR INDUSTRIAL DEVELOPMENT

There have also been poor schemes to support research  development activities of industry. 

To address this challenge, NPP will:

a. refocus operation of public research institutions to provide R&D support for selected strategic industries, and

b. provide specific incentives for establishment of R&D laboratories by private sector

VIII. ACCESS TO LAND FOR INDUSTRIAL DEVELOPMENT

Industry has also faced incoherent industrial development planning initiatives, as well as lack of land for development of industrial zones.

The NPP will address these challenges as follows:

a. facilitate access to dedicated land spaces in every region for establishment of multi-purpose industrial parks, sector specific industrial enclaves,  enterprise free zones

b. aggressively support development of existing  new industrial clusters  manufacturing enclaves, with a renewed
focus on value addition, skills development  jobs creation, and

c. develop vibrant commercial zones in our proximate international boundary areas to north, east  west  explore possibility of working jointly on industries with our neighbours in these commercial zones to create jobs,  as part of our efforts towards stronger economic integration of ECOWAS region.

IX. SKILLS DEVELOPMENT FOR INDUSTRY

Skills shortage is one of critical areas that NPP will address urgently. In this direction, NPP will:

a. establish apprenticeship  skills development centres to train skilled labour force for specific industrial sectors

b. develop, in collaboration with trade unions, a database for trained apprentices  artisans,  establish a National Apprentice Recruitment Agency

c. in partnership with private sector, transform apprenticeship training model   a supply-driven approach to a market demand model based on German apprenticeship model, and

d. create an information portal  set up a task force to assist our youth  artisans in making their products  services visible on a local, national,  global scale.

X. DOMESTIC TRADE

Challenges faced by Ghanaian businesses in retail sector include:

a. weak macroeconomic fundamentals, especially exchange rate, lending rate  inflation rate among others

b. flouting of rules regarding retail trade

c. high level of taxes

d. high cost of doing business, especially high prices of utilities  rent

e. inadequate access to government procurement opportunities  contracts, and

f. lack of governmental support for local market infrastructures

To address these challenges, NPP will:

a. ensure strict compliance with existing legislation  regulations in respect of retail trade

b. develop modern markets  retail infrastructure in every district to enhance domestic trade

XI. TRADE FACILITATION

Ghanaian businesses face many challenges in exporting or importing goods at ports. These challenges include:

a. excessive bureaucracy at ports

b. high port charges  fees, and

c. high incidence of corruption at ports

To address these challenges, NPP will:

a. reduce fees  charges at ports

b. introduce reforms in port clearing systems  benchmark our ports against some of best in world, such as Dubai  Singapore, to make them most efficient in Africa to support
import  export trade, and

c. restructure Customs Division of GRA to optimise its operational efficiency.

XII. CONSUMER PROTECTION

To protect Ghanaians   inferior quality goods, products,  services, we will:

a. facilitate passage of a Consumer Protection Law, and

b. strengthen operations of Ghana Standards Authority (GSA).

XIII. FLAGSHIP INDUSTRIAL DEVELOPMENT INITIATIVES

a. "One District One Factory Initiative": In collaboration with private sector, NPP will implement "One District, One Factory" Initiative. This District Industrialization Programme will ensure an even, spatial spread of industries.

b. Strategic Anchor Initiatives: Government will partner private local  foreign investors to develop large scale strategic anchor industries to serve as growth poles for economy, especially in petrochemicals, pharmaceuticals, iron  steel, cement, aluminium, salt, vehicle assembly, manufacture of heavy machinery, equipment  machine parts, agro-processing, garments  textiles, assembly of electronics  light machinery.

c. Industrial Sub-contracting Exchange: Through a concerted, collaborative  collective effort, NPP will enforce local content provisions by developing efficient  competitive local
supplier networks for goods  services that industry needs  that can realistically be sourced locally. To facilitate this, the
NPP will develop a National Industrial Sub-contracting Exchange to link SMEs with large scale enterprises.

XIV. MANAGING INDUSTRIAL WASTE

The NPP government will support establishment of recycling  reprocessing companies to manage industrial waste. This will extend industrial value chain as well as create a new raw material base for existing  new industries.

XV. EMPOWERING LOCAL BUSINESSES

The NPP believes in empowering local private sector  will pass legislation to require that at least 70% of all Government of Ghana, taxpayer-financed contracts  procurements be executed by local corporate entities.
In addition, NPP will introduce a policy requiring that 30% of required 70% be sourced   entities owned by women, persons with disability,  those established under Youth Enterprise Fund (YEF).

XVI. SUPPORT TO INDIGENOUS QUARRY, BUILDING,  CONSTRUCTION

To create jobs, whilst also supporting quarry, building,  construction industry in country, NPP will provide tax incentives for importation of quarry equipment, as well as facilitate establishment of credit lines to enable industry acquire state-of-the-art technology.

XVII. ATTRACTING FDIS INTO LABOUR INTENSIVE SECTOR

The NPP will promote greater integration with global economy  encourage Foreign Direct Investments (FDIs), especially in labour intensive sectors such as garments, textiles, agro-business  light manufacturing.

XVIII. EMPLOYING ALREADY TRAINED ESSENTIAL WORKERS

The NPP will facilitate early placement of trained nurses, public health personnel,  teachers who have been denied employment by NDC government.

XIX. HARMONY IN INDUSTRIAL RELATIONS

The NPP will work with stakeholders, including employers  trade unions, in an open, trustworthy  fair manner on employee welfare, as well as ensuring living wages for all workers. 

In this direction, we will:

a. develop, in collaboration with employers, trade unions, educational institutions  other state bodies, such as SSNIT, a database of labour market with view to establishing a
National Recruitment Agency to serve as primary source for channelling job openings to Ghanaians

b. develop labour market policies to build an employable, skilled labour force that is focused on personal  career development to promote mobility for higher productivity. policies will
also address industrial relations to enhance harmony between stakeholders, and

c. work with employers  trade unions to formulate a policy of comprehensive occupational health  safety standards

In sum, ours is a holistic approach to job creation. job creation strategies outlined in this chapter are by no means exhaustive. Other
job creation initiatives have been covered under other sectors in this manifesto.

Chapter 3
ENERGY  PETROLEUM

Under Kufuor-led NPP government (2001-2008), significant contributions were made to country’s energy resources  infrastructure as a result of our bold  farsighted policies. These
included:

i. discovery of oil  gas in commercial quantities

ii. construction of West African Gas Pipeline

iii. in response to emerging energy crisis of 2006/2007, through facilitations, procurements,  construction, an addition of 1440MW to Ghana’s generating capacity as follows:

* Bui Dam (400MW)

* Tema Thermal 1 Power Plant - TT1PP (126MW)

* Tema Thermal 2 Power Plant – TT2PP (49MW)

* Mines Reserve Plants (80MW)

* Kpone Thermal Power Plant (220MW)

* Additions to Akosombo Hydro Power (108MW)

* Takoradi 1 Power Plant – T1, Aboadze (132MW)

* Sunon Asogli Plant (200MW), and

* Osonor (now CENIT) Plant (126MW)

I. POWER SECTOR

The NDC government inherited an economy with no DUMSOR in 2009. However, energy sector has since been badly managed. poor management of sector has been characterized by shortfalls in power generation, corrupt  opaque procurement of new power plants, frequent power cuts, inefficiencies  unsustainable inter-utility debts, which threaten satisfactory long-term operation of power sector.

These problems have led to five years of DUMSOR  brought devastation to our industries, particularly small businesses. DUMSOR has caused job losses, income losses, unnecessary deaths, disrupted life  destroyed countless equipment  electrical appliances of businesses  homes.
The effect of last five years of DUMSOR on our economy has been devastating. Institute of Statistical Scientific  Economic Research
(ISSER), in its 2014 study, indicates, that on average, country is losing production worth about US$ 2.1 million per day (or, US$ 55.8 million per month) as a result of DUMSOR alone  that, country lost about US$680 million in 2014 translating into about 2% of GDP due to power crisis.
Whilst President is engaged in questionable power procurements, our dedicated state-owned power infrastructure   which revenue is generated by our utilities is collapsing. Akosombo has constantly been over-drafted, thermal plants are frequently breaking down;  all our plants operate below capacity. Takoradi 3 Thermal plant has been shut down, although it was commissioned only two years ago. It is not surprising, therefore, that country’s efforts in industrialization is clearly in danger under Mahama-led NDC government.
Today, energy sector faces an unprecedented financial crisis. very existence of our biggest electricity generator, Volta River Authority (VRA), is under serious threat, as its debts continue to increase. VRA’s debts stand at US$1.53 billion as of March 2016. These debts, which exclude current interest, roll-over fees  other charges are expected to hit $2 billion by end of this year. This is not only affecting VRA’s survival, but also domestic banking sector.
Rather than redeem its indebtedness, government chose to burden Ghanaian people with suffocating electricity tariffs  vanishing
power credits. government’s response to large inter-utility debts is to impose additional taxes on use of petroleum products  electricity. This has further reduced competitiveness of our local industries. cost of electricity to industry has been so alarmingly high it has led to collapse of many industries  small businesses  to relocation of others to neighbouring Cote d’Ivoire.
It is now clear that Mahama has run out of things on which to blame DUMSOR.   acts of God, to blaming Nigeria, to wishing it away, it is obvious that, five years into this state of affairs  Mahama announcing that he had fixed DUMSOR, he does not know how to provide Ghanaians with a long-term, stable  reliable electricity supply.
The hard, cold truth is that despite recent election-inspired, artificial semblance of stability in power supply situation, fundamental challenges leading to DUMSOR remain,  quick fixes have instead resulted in imposition of high cost emergency plants on Ghanaians, corruptly procured   AMERI  KARPOWER. We still owe millions of United States Dollars to Nigeria for gas supplies.
In fact, Mahama’s greatest legacy to Ghana as President is DUMSOR.
There is increased uncertainty about future stability of power supply under NDC government. Many businesses  residential consumers of electricity are justifiably afraid that DUMSOR would come back, if NDC is retained in power, as it has not demonstrated capacity in addressing these challenges.
The nation must change course if we are to stop job losses, poor management of our energy sector  eliminate financial burden imposed by government on our utility companies.

What NPP will do:

The NPP’s vision for energy sector is to develop a modern, diversified, efficient,  financially sustainable "Energy Economy" that will ensure that all Ghanaian homes  industries have access to an adequate, reliable, affordable  environmentally-sustainable supply of energy to meet their needs  to support accelerated growth  development agenda we envisage for country.

The NPP will achieve these goals through following measures:

a. end "DUMSOR" in short-term, through government liquidity injection, restructuring of debts,  securing of firm commitments for reliable supply of fuel

b. reduce taxes on electricity tariffs to provide immediate relief to households  industry

c. conduct a technical audit on all power sector infrastructure  develop  implement a 10-year Power Sector Master Plan which will be reviewed thereafter, to meet our medium to long-term energy needs

d. ensure that procurement of new power projects are executed primarily through PPP  IPP arrangements, which will be carried out in a transparent  competitive manner in order to achieve a least-cost addition of power generation infrastructure. current basis for procuring additional generation assets is inefficient  costly,  discourages production

e. develop  implement an Energy Sector Financial Restructuring  Recovery Plan, incorporating, a liquidity management mechanism for VRA, Electricity Company of Ghana (ECG), Northern Electricity Department (NED)  BDCs

f. leverage natural gas as a long term source central to operation of power sector. Consequently, NPP will develop and
implement a long-term LNG utilization programme. In addition, NPP will encourage  provide incentives to private sector to develop aggressively potential sources of indigenous natural gas in addition to those   Jubilee, TEN  SANKOFA oil/gas fields

g. ensure that there is sufficient Reserve Margin – safety cushion we need to prevent blackouts – to ensure stability of system

h. rapidly move to adoption of a distributed solar energy solution for all government  public buildings

i. create an environment of clear policies, rules  regulations,  provide adequate price incentives to attract private sector investments. NPP will prioritise  ensure actions to enhance  improve capacity of regulatory bodies, namely Public Utilities Regulatory Commission (PURC)  Energy Commission (EC) to discharge their responsibilities in a more transparent, timely  efficient manner. objective will be to ensure that costs in sector are recovered in a timely manner, utilities receive a fair return on their investments  consumers pay only for acceptable  efficient operation of utilities

j. aggressively pursue energy conservation  efficient use of energy, including reduction of transmission losses. In 2007, NPP government led a nationwide free distribution of 6 million compact fluorescent bulbs to consumers to replace incandescent bulbs, which led to a saving of about 200MW. We will implement similar initiatives involving LED bulbs  introduction of Minimum Energy Performance Standards for electric motors  industrial equipment

k. ensure that energy is produced  used in an environmentally sound manner

l. work within framework of Ghana’s obligations under Clean Development Mechanism (CDM), UN Framework on Climate Change (UNFCCC)  Conference of Parties 2015 (COP21). Under this framework, NPP will ensure that least cost environmentally friendly technologies are prioritized in expansion of country’s thermal generation portfolio. In particular Renewable Energy law will be reviewed to regulate  incentivise investments in renewable technologies

m. restructure power sector by bringing all hydro generation exclusively under VRA  create a separate thermal market, and

n. explore possibility of geothermal  tidal wave energy.

Renewable Energy Development

Ghana should develop low carbon energy to ensure environmental sustainability, energy security through diversity of energy sources  creation of green jobs.

In this direction, NPP will:

i. increase proportion of renewable energy in national generation mix by harnessing alternative energy options to ensure expansion of low carbon energy in our economy

ii. rapidly move to adoption of a distributed solar energy solution for all government  public buildings to reduce demand on national grid  reduce government expenditure on electricity

iii. build solar parks in northern part of country. To achieve this, we will provide investment tax credits to owners of commercial, industrial,  utility scale solar photovoltaic (PV) systems to take a one-time tax credit of qualified installed costs

iv. develop solar  wind mini-grids for irrigation  community water supply around country through Public Private Partnerships (PPPs), and

v. ensure local supply of solar panels to meet requirement of our policy proposals, by establishing a Renewable Energy Industrial Zone where private sector will be supported to build factories for production  assembling of full components of solar power systems.

II. PETROLEUM SECTOR

In 2007, when commercial quantities of oil  gas were discovered in Jubilee Fields as a result of Kufuor-led NPP government’s bold
and farsighted policies, many Ghanaians hoped for improved conditions of living through transformative effect of oil.

Ghana produced first oil in 2009. Seven years on, many Ghanaians have lost hope in promise of oil. What they see under Mahama-led NDC government is an unrestrained move towards what is popularly called "oil curse". oil  gas sector has been poorly managed to extent that our oil is exported in crude form, even though we have a refinery that can add value to it. Ghana’s oil industry no longer attracts serious investors, despite substantial de-risking of some of our oil basins. Inexperienced  unknown companies are holding exclusive oil rights in our basins, most of whom are not fulfilling their work obligations. Countries that have benefited significantly   oil implemented policies that accelerated value addition to economy, by promoting development of forward  backward linkages  by investing revenue   oil in strategic social  economic programmes. This has not been case in Ghana. Ghanaians are yet to feel impact of oil  gas sector seven years into production although US$3 billion has been received by government as its share of revenue   oil.
Holders of Ghana’s Petroleum Agreements are unsuccessfully shopping for money because they have no track record, leaving our oil blocks inactive. This situation is result of lack of credible processes for ensuring a transparent  efficient allocation of exploration rights.
In downstream sector, Mahama-led NDC government’s failure to finance petroleum subsidies, occasioned by exchange losses  manipulations of automatic price adjustment formula, have led to huge accumulation of debts by BDCs, some of which can no longer raise letters of credit to support petroleum importation.
Rather than solve problem, government chose to kill local companies by taking their businesses for Bulk Oil Storage Transportation Company (BOST), which was established to keep strategic reserves, thereby undermining indigenization policy in downstream petroleum sub-sector  contributing to job  revenue losses. In process, BOST has moved away   its core mandate  become virtually sole importer of crude oil under arrangements that are not transparent.
In addition to this, implementation of petroleum price deregulation policy is facing some difficulties. Crude oil price reductions do not translate into pump prices, as a result of government’s appetite for revenue,  this has deepened macroeconomic instability which has further contributed to a loss of business confidence.

What NPP will do:

The NPP commits to a transparent, accountable  efficient management of country’s petroleum resources for benefit of all Ghanaians.

In pursuant of this, NPP will:

Petroleum Upstream  Mid-Stream Sector

a. improve transparency in management of our oil  gas resources. Our commitment to passing Right to Information Bill will further enhance transparency in oil  gas sector

b. create an enabling environment through fiscal  non-fiscal measures to attract domestic  foreign investments in oil  gas exploration

c. in collaboration with private sector, accelerate oil exploration in Voltaian Basin (Northern, Volta, Ashanti, Eastern,  Brong Ahafo), as well as in Keta  Accra Basins to enhance Ghana’s potential for increasing oil  gas production  to build these areas into industrial growth poles

d. develop, in collaboration with private sector, Western Region into a regional oil services hub with a first class port facility, as well as positioning it as an efficient centre for back-office support for oil industry in West African region, including relocation of headquarters of GNPC to region

e. empower local firms to play progressively active roles in oil  gas value chain through capacity development, financing  partnership support

f. aggressively invest in education  skills enhancement of Ghanaians to manage oil  gas sector under an "Accelerated Oil Capacity Development Programme"

g. in collaboration with private sector, create jobs in high impact areas such as fabrication  installation, manufacturing of equipment  parts  construction of oil  gas infrastructure, and

h. restructure Ghana National Petroleum Corporation to focus on its core mandate, improve on its corporate governance  become a national vehicle for maximizing value of our oil and
gas resources.

Petroleum Downstream

a. support growth of local competition by redeeming government obligations to BDCs

b. address macroeconomic instability to ensure effective implementation of petroleum price deregulation policy

c. expand Tema Oil Refinery (TOR)  ensure BOST reverts to its core mandate of protecting our strategic petroleum reserves

d. ensure that crude oil produced in Ghana is refined here to add value to our oil  to build a petrochemical industry as an important growth pillar for economy

e. improve on quality of fuel produced in Ghana or imported by reviewing standards for sulphur content in fuels. This will ensure that low sulphur fuel is sold to consumers to reduce risks of poor quality fuels to environment, health  durability of motor vehicles, and

f. facilitate, in collaboration with private sector, establishment of an oil refinery in Sekondi-Takoradi.

III. PETROLEUM REVENUE MANAGEMENT

i. review  further amend Petroleum Revenue Management Act 2011 (Act 815) to support investment of revenue   oil in high-impact strategic social  economic infrastructure

ii. between 2017  2020, primarily allocate revenue   oil to infrastructure, health, education  agriculture

iii. leverage oil revenue to complete Accra-Kumasi-Paga rail line connections  rehabilitation of Western  Eastern Rail Lines, and

iv. manage  use revenue   Jubilee, as well as   TEN  SANKOFA fields, in a responsible  transparent manner.

Chapter 4
AGRICULTURE  RURAL DEVELOPMENT
NEW PATRIOTIC PARTY
DEVELOPMENT IN FREEDOM

Agriculture continues to be anchor of country’s economy, employing more than half of our workforce. Growth in this sector has declined dramatically under NDC’s mismanagement, incompetence  corruption. Food is unnecessarily expensive in a country that is blessed with fertile land. Our production methods are not modern  income levels of farmers  fisherfolk remain low, thus making sector unattractive for youth as a sustainable means of livelihood.
Our vision for next four years is to modernize agriculture, improve production efficiency, achieve food security,  profitability for our farmers, all aimed at significantly increasing agricultural productivity.
The NPP will pursue a value-addition strategy, aimed at rapidly ramping up agro-processing  developing new  stable markets for our
products.
Our policies  interventions will ensure that our farmers  fisherfolk earn higher incomes. Our reforms will encompass full agricultural value chain  create additional businesses  job opportunities in areas of storage, transport, processing, packaging  marketing of
agricultural produce.
District Assemblies  Traditional Authorities will be assigned specific roles in agricultural development  NPP will adopt policies specifically targeted at supporting women in agriculture.

I. IMPROVING PRODUCTION EFFICIENCY

In pursuing improvements in production efficiency, NPP will do following:

a. Improved Seeds  Fertilizers

* ensure that farming inputs are readily available within farming communities at affordable prices

* support private certified seed growers to increase substantially supply of improved seeds to farmers

* increase subsidies on retail prices of seeds, fertilizers  other agrochemicals, and
* tap into our gas  petroleum resources, to produce locally fertilisers for industry to improve agricultural yield  save foreign exchange.

b. Irrigation Development

The NPP Government undertook  completed feasibility studies for irrigating Accra Plains, Afram Plains,  Northern Savannah. Over last eight years, however, lands in Accra Plains have been largely lost to encroachment due to deliberate inaction by NDC
Government. NPP will reactivate plans for remaining areas, to mitigate crop failures related to inadequate rainfall,  also to facilitate year-round farming by:

* as a matter of urgency, rehabilitating existing public irrigation schemes, including abandoned Vea Irrigation Scheme

* focusing on developing irrigation schemes in Afram Plains  Northern Savannah

* providing a mechanism to capture water released by annual spillage of Bagre dam in Burkina to use for irrigation in north. We will also begin immediate discussions with the
Government of Burkina Faso for a more controlled spillage of dam to prevent flooding that takes place, and

* facilitating provision of community-owned  managed small-scale irrigation facilities across country, especially in northern Ghana, through policy of "One Village, One Dam".

c. Extension Services

Extension services to farmers have been cut back severely under Mahama-led NDC government. Today, one extension officer is responsible for over 3,000 farmers. NPP will work to achieve UN-recommended ratio of one extension officer to 500 farmers, with emphasis on recruiting female extension officers.

d. Research

The NPP will revive research programmes of Council for Scientific  Industrial Research (CSIR), as well as of agricultural  related sciences departments of our public Universities  other institutions. Furthermore, NPP will promote,  provide incentives for research into utilization of remote sensing  satellite imaging technologies to map soil properties nationwide, to enable us match them to specific agricultural produce  cultivation strategies, as well as to enable us determine appropriate blend of fertilizers for our soils, matching them with appropriate crops for improved yields  efficiency.

e. Mechanization

We intend to pursue a policy of mechanisation in production of agricultural produce. Currently, there are about 85 mechanisation centres across country, which are not functioning. We will revamp existing centres  support private sector to establish, manage,  provide affordable mechanisation services to farmers.
The NPP will also facilitate supply of power tillers  other appropriate technologies for smallholder operations.

f. Commercial  Block farming

There is a need to promote  accelerate commercial large scale farming. NPP will start with investing resources into block farming initiatives. Commercial  block farming introduce economies of scale which are necessary for efficient use of machinery  support infrastructure.
In this direction, Government-facilitated block farming will be properly implemented, devoid of cronyism  political interference that have turned NDC’s implementation of this largely proven farming technique into a complete failure.

The NPP will:

a. provide a framework within which smallholder farmers, irrespective of political persuasion, can be aggregated to take advantage of economies of scale, and

b. provide incentives, including land banks for strategic investors, for establishment of large scale commercial farms, particularly in Northern Savannah  Afram Plains. Each of commercial farms will have an outgrower component to benefit smallholding farmers in locality.

II. DEVELOPMENT OF PRODUCTS

In modernising our agricultural sector, NPP government aims at ensuring food security as well as producing quality raw materials for industry. NPP will pay special attention to selected products for accelerated development, including grains, fruits, vegetables, tubers, oil palm, cotton, shea, cashew, cocoa, horticulture, livestock, fisheries  poultry.

a. Crop Production

* Grains: Our targeted grains will be maize, millet, sorghum, rice  soya beans. We plan a rapid expansion in production of grains, particularly maize  soya beans, to support both
human consumption  domestic poultry industry.

* Cassava: We intend to encourage farming of cassava on a large scale for commercial  industrial purposes.

* Oil Palm, Cashew, Cotton  Shea: To facilitate provision of technical support  finance, NPP will help organize producers of these crops into producers’ associations. In
particular, NPP will pursue value addition to these products as core strategy of an agriprocessing  agribusiness
development plan  help promote them.

* Horticultural Crops: NPP will promote production, based on commercial farms with outgrowers, to support exports.

* Cocoa: NPP’s objective over next four years is to restore production to over one million metric tonnes per annum. NPP will, therefore, redesign following policies,  position them
as farmer-owned  managed programmes:

- reactivate  expand mass spraying  Hi-tech programmes

- replant old cocoa farms with high-yielding  disease-resistant plants

- we recognise suffering many farmers have undergone due to NDC Government’s failure to compensate farmers who lose their trees to swollen shoot disease. NPP will reintroduce compensation payments under cocoa disease control programme

- ensure that farmers receive increased producer prices plus bonuses high enough to encourage them to produce more cocoa for export

- ensure that value that farmers receive for their produce is not diluted by depreciation of cedi against dollar

- facilitate access to farmlands for youth in cocoa producing areas

- set up special schemes to attract youth into cocoa farming

- strengthen  expand local cocoa processing, and

- intensify search for new markets for our processed cocoa products

b. Livestock, Fisheries,  Poultry

To ensure that population has a sustainable source of protein, NPP plans to develop through following measures a vibrant livestock  industry in addition to fisheries, while resuscitating collapsed poultry industry.

The NPP will:

* Livestock

- aggressively promote cattle ranching  will provide incentives to private sector to develop cattle ranches

- in collaboration with private sector, NPP will facilitate establishment of Livestock Development Centres in three agro-climatic zones to promote production of cattle  small ruminants like sheep  goats

- facilitate land acquisition for cattle ranching by private sector

- support our relevant tertiary institutions to train more veterinary doctors  staff, and

- enact  enforce laws to limit cattle grazing to fenced-in areas designated as fodder/grazing banks for cattle.

* Fisheries
The NPP will implement following policies for a sustainable  modernised fishing industry:

- ensure availability as well as effective  transparent distribution of pre-mix fuel to fisherfolk

- eliminate import duties for fishing equipment like nets  outboard motors

- enforce fisheries management policies, such as those embodied in Fisheries Act, 2002 (Act 625), including on pair trawling  other illegal  unapproved fishing methods

- protect our fishing stocks by providing patrol boats to stop foreign fishing vessels

- continue with programme of building landing sites  storage facilities, at places such as Cape Coast, Mumford, Teshie, Axim, Keta, Ada, Jamestown,  Winneba

- restore Korle Lagoon, including reintroduction of its fish stocks

- in collaboration with private sector, accelerate aquaculture by promoting extensive fish farming throughout country

- in collaboration with private sector, NPP will develop inland fishing across country by developing related infrastructure

- place local fisherfolk directly in charge of subsidised inputs through local, designated outlets, and

- under our industrialisation policy, promote local production of fishing nets  other inputs.

* Poultry

The poultry industry has virtually collapsed. main challenges are high cost of poultry feed, due to dependence on importation of key ingredients, such as soya bean  cake,  also high cost of locally-produced maize.

Addressing these challenges requires a holistic approach  key NPP policies will evolve around:

- supporting private sector to expand local production of poultry feed  veterinary products

- supporting efficient production of both maize  soya beans

- facilitating access to credit by industry

- encouraging local poultry meat processing, and

- instituting anti-dumping measures on poultry

III. STORAGE, PROCESSING  TRANSPORT

The NPP will support selected products beyond farm gate to incorporate post-harvest activities, including storage, transportation, processing, packaging  distribution by:

a. providing incentives to private sector  District Assemblies to invest in post-harvest activities, including building of pack houses  storage facilities both on farms  in locations close to production centres

b. supporting small  medium scale agro-processing enterprises, particularly women-owned, to acquire appropriate technology  basic processing machinery, and

c. continuing to expand  upgrade road infrastructure connecting farming communities to marketing centres.

IV. MARKETING

A major focus of NPP administration will be to ensure that food producers can be guaranteed buyers  can obtain fair  attractive prices for their products.

In this respect, an NPP government will:

a. expedite full implementation of an active Commodity Exchange

b. use its purchasing power to create demand for locally-produced food items by ensuring that all foods purchased with government funds, for example under School Feeding Programme, are
locally produced

c. endeavour not only to expand existing, but also open up new domestic  export markets

d. develop market support services for selected horticulture, food  industrial crops to enhance production for export

e. facilitate  support establishment of stakeholder-controlled marketing companies for grains  selected products, including a Cashew Marketing Authority, and

f. revive Grains Development Board

Chapter 5
GROWING TOGETHER:
NEW PATRIOTIC PARTY
DEVELOPMENT IN FREEDOM
RE-ORIENTING CAPITAL EXPENDITURE
TO RURAL COMMUNITIES, INNER
CITIES, COASTAL/FISHING, AND
ZONGO COMMUNITIES

The challenges of development  poverty in country should not be a matter of geographical location. Around country, there are millions who face poverty  deprivation daily,  who need urgent, deliberate  forceful intervention   state to improve their lives  their circumstances.
An NPP government, between 2017  2020, will aggressively pursue policies that will be targeted at particular segments of our population who continue to be excluded,  who miss out on myriad of opportunities that abound not only in country, but also in today’s globalised world.

Growing Together consists of seven major economic initiatives, designed to take giant leaps in transforming Ghana holistically, with particular emphasis on rural  deprived communities, in a major effort at inclusive development of all parts of country, by adopting a localised development approach.

They are:

a. Infrastructure for Poverty Eradication Programme (IPEP)

b. restructuring of Savannah Accelerated Development Authority (SADA) to original design  mandate of Northern Development Authority (NDA)

c. establishment of a Middle Belt Development Authority (MBA)

d. establishment of a Coastal Development Authority (CDA)

e. establishment of a Zongo Development Fund

f. creation of a new, "Western North" Administrative Region, and

g. restructuring of Royalty Sharing Ratios with Mining Communities to increase share of revenues that mining communities currently receive in royalty payments.

I. INFRASTRUCTURE FOR POVERTY ERADICATION PROGRAMME (IPEP)

The NPP will reorient national capital expenditure budget to place a focus on local constituency-specific needs. In this vein, an amount of equivalent of $275 million will be reallocated   our existing capital expenditure budget to IPEP, a bold project at providing
local solutions to local problems. IPEP will enable capital expenditure (including equipment) at local level to be met, in order to accelerate specific local growth goals. Every constituency in country will be allocated equivalent of $1 Million annually to finance capital expenditure on upgrading  improving infrastructure, and/or on developing new facilities especially in rural  deprived communities.
It is envisaged, as part of their core mandate, that three Development Authorities - Northern, Middle Belt,  Coastal - will be primary executing agencies under IPEP.
The Development Authorities will report directly to Office of President, which will ensure accountability in their operations.

II. NORTHERN DEVELOPMENT AUTHORITY (NDA)

The NDC, in 2008, promised to take immediate  urgent steps to bridge development gap between Northern  Southern Ghana through setting up of a Savannah Accelerated Development Authority (SADA) to be directly under president, with a vision  mandate to accelerate socio-economic development of savannah belt of northern Ghana. They promised to establish a Special Development Fund for SADA  pledged an initial start-up contribution to this fund of GH¢200 million, with additional annual contributions   Government of GH¢100 million each year for 20 years.
The NDC also promised that once SADA was established, Government will lead a Donor Conference on northern Ghana, with aim to raising an additional $200 million   country’s Development Partners  private sector, in order to assure new Authority a firm  financially solid foundation.
Per manifesto promise of NDC, SADA should have had at least a billion cedis allocated   Government to it by now, in addition to other funds that were to be sourced   Development Partners  private sector.

Actual Picture

However, according to 2012 manifesto of NDC, GH¢260 million Ghana cedis had been allocated to SADA by 2012. In 2013  2014 Budgets, GH¢20 million Ghana cedis was allocated to SADA per year, while there was no mention of SADA in 2015  2016 Budgets. This means that a total of only GHc300 million has been allocated to
the SADA programme as at 2016, compared to promised one billion Ghana cedis. Not only has Mahama-led NDC government refused to make resources available to SADA, they have also supervised  led thievery of GHc300 million allocated to SADA. GHc300 million was entirely pilfered into private pockets. Since 2012, SADA has not received funds   government for any capital project. This situation contravenes Savannah Accelerated
Development Act, 2010 (Act 805), which enjoins government to make annual budgetary allocations to SADA.
Also, seven years after passage of SADA law, provision that stipulates that parts of taxes on non-petroleum imports will be allocated
to help ensure sustainable SADA funding is yet to be implemented.
Seven years after implementation of SADA, development of northern Ghana has stalled  may actually be on a backward slide. What is crystal clear is that seven years after implementation of SADA, poverty levels are still stubbornly high in northern Ghana.

According to 2013 Ghana Living Standards Survey, more than four in every ten persons are poor in Upper East Region (44.4%), increasing to one in every two in Northern Region (50.45%)  seven out of every ten in Upper West (70.7%). In terms of extreme poverty incidence, three northern regions continue to have a higher rate of extreme poverty than national average,  also than all other coastal  forest regions who have rates lower than national average. Upper West region has highest extreme poverty incidence of 45.1 per cent, followed by Northern (22.8%)  Upper East (21.3%).

The tree planting  guinea fowl projects implemented by SADA, in June 2012, cost nation GH¢33million  GH¢15 million respectively, with those contracts being terminated midway as a result of public
uproar. President Mahama, in January 2014, ordered discontinuation of these contracts long after whole contract amounts had been paid out in 2013 to consultants.

From foregoing, it is easy to draw conclusion that there is simply
very little commitment to SADA by NDC, beyond usual rhetoric  corruption.

What NPP Will Do

The NPP will restructure SADA, transform it into a more focused Northern Development Authority (NDA) as originally envisaged  make it a flagship programme for economic transformation of three northern regions. There will be presidential-led support for genuine entrepreneurship development in northern Ghana. Industrialists, entrepreneurs, manufacturers, food processors  marketers, crop, livestock  fish farmers  artisans in northern Ghana will witness a new dawn of public support for meaningful economic transformation in northern Ghana.

The implementation of structural transformation of economy of northern Ghana will hang on strategies that will include following:

a. a transformed agriculture sector in northern Ghana that provides critical linkage between agriculture  industry

b. accelerated provision of irrigation infrastructure, enhanced access to credit  inputs for agriculture, processing  export

c. improved access to mechanized agriculture, with modernized extension services  accelerated infrastructure provision for livestock  aquaculture

d. interventions in agriculture, complemented by appropriate interventions in trade  industrial sectors in northern Ghana

e. integrated approach to rural development. This will involve provision of agricultural investments, together with basic infrastructure like potable water, sanitation, electricity, road network, schools, health facilities, low cost housing,  small  medium scale industries among others in farming communities

f. special incentives for investors to locate agricultural processing factories within farming communities

g. support for retention of water for irrigation  dry season farming through a policy of "One Village, One Dam" to provide
"dams" to all villages

h. ensure development of a healthy, knowledgeable, well-trained  disciplined labour force with capacity to drive  sustain private sector-led growth in northern Ghana. broad areas of intervention here will include education especially in Science, Technology, Engineering,  Mathematics (STEM), health, safe water  environmental sanitation, urban housing  slum upgrading

i. work with private sector to establish agro-processing industries  manufacturing/assembly plants to provide sustainable jobs for unemployed youth of northern regions

j. provide incentives for private investors for sustainable exploration of minerals in three northern regions, and

k. pursue an employment-centred economic growth  development strategy.

III. MIDDLE BELT DEVELOPMENT AUTHORITY(MBA)

Like other authorities under "Growing Together", Middle Belt Development Authority (MBA) will serve as main development agency for middle belt of country, in particular, covering Northern Volta, proposed "Western North Region", Ashanti Region, Eastern Region,  Brong Ahafo Region. MBA will administer IPEP in these areas.

IV. COASTAL DEVELOPMENT AUTHORITY (CDA)

The Coastal Development Authority (CDA) will serve as principal development agency for coastal communities of country, covering
the coastal areas of Volta  Western Regions,  Greater Accra  Central Regions. Again, CDA will administer IPEP in these areas.

V. ZONGO DEVELOPMENT FUND (ZDF)

This fund is designed to help develop Zongos. Residents in mostly densely-populated Zongos have peculiar infrastructure deficits, social services deficit,  poor sanitation management, which require special attention. Over years, these communities have been 'left behind' in development planning. Residents  their needs have been poorly identified, leading to inadequate  sometimes inappropriate interventions in provision of social services  physical infrastructures.

The NPP Zongo policy is aimed at developing these communities in order to unleash their potentials to become centres of opportunity.

In this direction, we will establish Zongo Development Fund (ZDF) to invest in:

a. education  training within Zongos

b. improved infrastructure in Zongos targeting health  sanitation

c. supporting local businesses  centres of culture  arts, and

d. community policing  security.

VI. CREATION OF A NEW "WESTERN NORTH" ADMINISTRATIVE REGION

Following relevant constitutional procedures, NPP proposes to create a "Western North" region out of existing Western Region in order to open it up for accelerated development. northern part of Western Region is resource-rich, but has not, like most parts of nation, fully reached its economic potential. There is a strong economic case for creating a "Western North Region". The
combined contribution of two regions, each focusing on its core potential, for example, South, part of present day Western Region, in industry, shipping, oil  gas,  new Western North in minerals, agro-processing  forestry products, will impact positively on national GDP. Locally they will help in creating new jobs  entrepreneurial opportunities for youth of these regions. In addition, creation of region will enhance administrative efficiency, as well as service delivery. NPP will, therefore, facilitate its establishment.

VII. INCREASED SHARE OF MINING ROYALTIES

With regard to mineral royalties, NPP’s policy is to ensure that mining communities receive a higher share. Currently, 80% of royalty goes to Government, 10% to Minerals Commission,  10% to community. NPP will reduce Government share to 70%, while doubling community share to 20%. additional 10% to community will be
given to District Assemblies to be used specifically for developing infrastructure in mining communities. This will ensure more value is retained in mining communities for
development.

Together, seven programmes under Growing Together will be directed at implementing key decentralised action plans, to realise enormous resources available in every part of country – human, natural, technological,  financial. This will help boost pivotal sectors in various zones  develop much needed infrastructure aimed at stimulating growth, creating jobs,  improving lives  opportunities of life in these areas, as well as helping create viable local economies.

Chapter 6
INFRASTRUCTURE

NPP will embark on a sustainable  integrated infrastructural development programme across country. integrated programme will address infrastructure that supports a modern road network, housing, water systems, aviation, ICT, ports, harbours,  railways. NPP will ensure best value for money  meaningful local participation in ICT at all levels. programme will focus on reducing cost of transportation, while decreasing time it takes to move goods, food items  people   one location to another. We will create jobs  prosperity through our Integrated Infrastructure Development Programme.

I. MASSIVE CORRUPTION, HALLMARK OF INFRASTRUCTURE DEVELOPMENT UNDER MAHAMA

Infrastructure development under Mahama-led NDC government has been characterised by massive corruption through contract overpricing, opaque  shady contracting processes,  gross abuse of sole sourcing provisions of Public Procurement Act, 2003 (Act 663).
As a result, while country’s debt stock has ballooned precariously due to reckless borrowing of Mahama-led NDC government ostensibly for purpose of developing nation's infrastructure, expenditure on infrastructure has declined considerably   an average of 11.5% of GDP between 2001  2008 to 5.7% of GDP between 2009  2015. 2016 expenditure on infrastructure is even lower at 4.2% of GDP. cost of all infrastructure expenditure undertaken, by Mahama-led NDC government   loans, grants  taxes between 2009  2015, is approximately $7 billion. Meanwhile, government has borrowed equivalent of, at time of borrowing, $39 billion, which, according to Government, is US$26 billion on basis of current book value. Nevertheless, critical question still arises: where is rest of money?

Indeed, according to Managing Director of IMF, most of Ghana's borrowing has been used for consumption,  not for investment. Overpricing of contracts, corruption  absence of value for money considerations are largely responsible for this.

Among many examples of acts of corruption under Mahama-led NDC government are following:

a. of two identical sets of teachers’ bungalows, standing side by side, in Dambai Teacher Training College, one constructed by
the NPP in 2007 cost GH¢195,000  that by NDC in 2011 costed 4.6 times more at GH¢900,000

b. a runway rehabilitation at Kumasi airport by Mahama-led NDC government cost US$23.8 million, whereas same government proposes to build a brand new airport in Ho at about same cost, estimated at $25 million. Comparatively, Ethiopia is building its brand new Shire Airport at a cost of $21 million.

c. in AMERI Power deal, Ghana is paying US$510 million for 10 gas power plants, which could have been acquired directly   General Electric (GE) for US$220 million. Overpricing of contracts, through use of sole sourcing, is a corrupt procurement method of choice very typical of Mahama-led NDC government. Egypt, for example, is constructing a 1800MW gas power plant at a cost of $1.3 billion. Abu Dhabi is constructing a 1600MW gas power plant at a cost of $1.5 billion. Together, AMERI  KARPOWER deals will cost Ghana over $2 billion over five years,  yet will give us a mere 505MW

d. an amount of GH¢3.65 million, almost US$1 million, earmarked for railway development   oil funds, was in fact used for rebranding of 116 Metro Mass Rapid Transit buses. It turns out that actual cost of work done, executed by a third party, was GH¢11,600, and

e. University of Ghana acquired a loan facility of US$217 Million   Israeli Government to build a 600-bed teaching hospital. However, cost of building new 600-bed teaching hospital by University of Ghana is $30m less than cost of renovating  expanding Ridge Hospital   a 200-bed to a 420-bed facility.

These are just a few examples of corrupt nature of infrastructure development under Mahama-led NDC government. Indeed, given resources at its disposal, nation should have received at least four to five times quantum of investment that NDC claims to have undertaken in terms of infrastructure development.

In addition to taking measures to curb massive corruption in infrastructure development Sector  to ensure that Ghana receives value-for-money on all such projects, key component of our Integrated
Infrastructure Development Programme are:

a. National Asset Protection Project

b. development of interconnected Roads, Railways, Ports & Harbours (RRHPs) Systems

c. development of an aviation hub for international & regional airlines

d. a Water For All Programme to ensure every Ghanaian has access to potable water

e. Food Control Interventions

f. mainstreaming ICT in governance & public service delivery, and

g. a quality, affordable Housing For All Strategy

II. NATIONAL ASSET PROTECTION PROJECT

It is a national scandal that successive governments have failed or unduly delayed in continuing  executing projects started by previous governments.

One of major challenges in efficient management of public finances,  in economic development is inability or unwillingness of succeeding governments to complete projects started by predecessor governments. Consequently, billions of Ghana cedis are locked up in numerous uncompleted projects scattered around country. NPP will break with this tradition.

The NPP will establish a National Asset Protection Project to perform following functions:

i. conduct a physical  financial audit to locate, identify  value each of these assets

ii. conduct a Social Impact, Economic Impact  Financial Viability Assessment of each of these assets with view of completing those that meet set criteria, and

iii. establish a special-purpose Asset Securitization Vehicle to hold these assets,  leverage them to raise funds for their completion. This enables state retain control over valuable assets, while still being able to release capital for development purposes.

In addition to policy leading to protection of national assets  safeguarding national wealth, it will also lead to three major benefits:

i. job creation - an army of student architects  draughtsmen, as well as property valuers  related professionals, will be deployed in all districts to conduct audit  also be involved in completion of these projects

ii. value creation - Government will be able to access a vast pool of funds for completion of these projects  further development, and

iii. continuity of projects - continuity in development will be assured as funds will be available to continue projects started by predecessor governments.

III. ROADS, RAILWAYS, PORTS,  HARBOURS (RRHPS)

The lack of a modern, integrated,  well-maintained transportation infrastructure is one of weakest links in our development. As well as deficits in quantum of Roads, Railways, Ports,  Harbours (RRPHs), existing infrastructure is poorly maintained  integrated, which requires an expedited  focused attention, as we aim to grow rapidly this economy.

Between 2001  2008, NPP extended country’s road network by 80%. Unfortunately, for period 2009 to 2016, NDC has only been able to extend road network by 6% at grossly inflated costs. There are still some missing links  major river crossing points that do not make road network fully inter-connected. proportion of country’s road network in gravel  earth surface conditions remains high at about 77%.

Since its establishment in early twentieth century by colonial government, railway network has also not seen any significant development. It is obsolete  wholly inadequate. Ghana Railway Authority (GRA), which was subsequently established, is underresourced  incapable of fulfilling its mandate. Worse, funds meant for development of railway network were diverted towards corrupt bus branding scandal.

Furthermore, West Africa lacks a clear maritime hub which provides an opportunity, with continuous improvement in our maritime sector, to make Ghana West Africa’s maritime hub. There is also a need to make right kinds of investment to develop potential inland port sites. Sadly, road construction has been one of areas in which corruption under Mahama-led NDC government has become legendary. Inflated contract prices, sole sourcing  receipt of inducements for contracts by no less a person as President of Republic has resulted in roads with reduced lifespans, as well as accidents on our roads.

Using Public Private Partnerships (PPP) where appropriate, NPP will undertake a massive investment in RRPHs infrastructure, in order to open up economy for flow of goods  people within country,    international  regional trade, leading to accelerated
development of all parts of country.

a. NPP’s Policy on Roads, Railways, Ports,  Harbours (RRHPs)

The NPP will:

* instil discipline, transparency,  competitiveness in construction of roads  development of railways, ports  harbours
* enhance movement of goods  people while also aiming at increasing quality of life of our citizens by reducing traffic congestion, negative effect of dust pollution on their health
and road traffic accidents, and

* institute a robust maintenance scheme for our RRPHs infrastructure to maximise its lifetime value  returns for our economy

Cost Reduction Strategies

NPP will:

* adhere strictly to provisions of Procurement Law in order to reduce high project costs  obtain value for money in project
award and

* pass legislation for at least 20% of road contracts, awarded to foreign contractors, to be sub-contracted to local contractors

b. Roads

NPP will:

* expand  improve road network, while closing missing links in network

* tar gravel roads, especially in areas of high agricultural production  tourism

* tar roads in District capitals  extend them to major towns within district

* increase network of public transportation system in collaboration with all stakeholders, and

* integrate databases of DVLA, Police  insurance companies in order to reduce time  cost of acquiring relevant documents  permits needed to register  operate vehicles.

c. Railways

NPP will, in collaboration with private sector:

* develop a modern railway network with strong economic linkages. Western  Eastern Lines will be completely overhauled. This will facilitate haulage of bauxite, manganese, cocoa, cement, iron ore  other bulk commodities as well as transportation of people. rehabilitation of Eastern Line, in particular, will also facilitate operation of Boankra Inland Port which has been rendered inoperable as a result of nonfunctioning of line. activation of Boankra Inland Port will lead to creation of thousands of jobs.

* develop an integrated Light Rail Transit System for our major cities to connect main business districts with outlying residential
locations

* expand railway network to north of Ghana to create more economic opportunities  link country with neighbouring countries. This will be done by extending Eastern Rail Line   Kumasi to Paga, to create an Accra-Kumasi-Paga connection to facilitate haulage of goods from,  to North,  exploitation of iron ore  other mineral reserves in North, and

* build a Tema-Akosombo Rail Link to tie in with a vibrant  revived Volta Lake transportation system to provide a major avenue for expanded transportation  resulting economic
activity.

d. Ports  Harbours

NPP will:

* continue expansion of ports  fully automate process for clearing goods  vehicles, leading to a reduction in port charges  fees

* continue expansion  modernisation of Tema  Takoradi harbours

* in collaboration with private sector, expand Takoradi Harbour to Sekondi. A logistics centre will be developed in Sekondi as part of expansion in order to boost economic activities in locality  its environs

* in collaboration with private sector, construct new harbours at Jamestown in Accra  in Keta

* in collaboration with private sector, develop an inland port at Buipe

* strengthen capacity of Ghana Maritime Authority to enable it effectively play its regulatory role in maritime industry

* in collaboration with private sector, develop Volta River into a major transportation artery by building modern ferry ports at such locations as Buipe, Yapei, Yeji, Makango, Kwadwokurom, Kete-Krachi, Adowso, Ekyeamanfrom, Akateng,  Boso

h. in collaboration with private sector, increase number of ferries on Volta River.

These investments will also increase volume of business   landlocked countries in region.

e. Maintenance Scheme

NPP will:

* clear huge backlog of road maintenance works, resulting   eight years of neglect by NDC government

* subsequently ensure a timely maintenance of roads

* establish a timely  effective preventive maintenance plan for all public transportation vehicles, and

* strengthen current axle load control on our road corridors to reduce deterioration rate of our roads.

f. Increased Quality of Life

NPP will:

* tar roads leading to district  regional hospitals, in order to speed up access to health facilities in case of emergency

* promote research into local road construction materials to strengthen existing gravel pavements  dampen dust pollution

* reduce fatalities  injuries on our roads by:

- scaling up efforts in road safety programmes by amending law to empower National Road Safety Commission to enforce  sanction against road sector operators, who do not comply with laws on road safety

- embarking on nationwide road sign  road marking placements, and

- reviewing location  lay-bys of fuel stations, in order to reduce accidents on our highways.

* reduce traffic congestion by:

- widening major arterial roads to multi-lane carriageways

- constructing lay-bys  dedicated traffic lanes for high occupancy buses

- building, in collaboration with private sector, new entry points into major cities like Accra, Takoradi, Kumasi  Tamale, and

- constructing, in collaboration with private sector, bypasses  interchanges at major intersections like Point 7, Tamale, Tema Motorway Roundabout, Suame Roundabout  Oforikrom Intersection in Kumasi,  the
Takoradi PTC Roundabout.

IV. AVIATION

The NPP will seek to make country’s airports aviation hubs for international  regional airlines within West Africa by:

a. working with private sector to offer modern, attractive air transport infrastructure, and

b. building capacity  establishing institutional  policy framework to enhance safety  security of air services

The domestic aviation industry is under severe stress. Air fares have gone up significantly, following introduction of 17.5% VAT in 2015 on airline tickets, coupled with a new policy to force domestic airlines to purchase handling services at Kotoka International Airport   either Menzes or Aviance. relatively high cost of aviation fuel  depreciation
of cedi have also contributed to decline in sector.

Consequently, passenger numbers dropped   718,725 in 2014 to 525,440 in 2015, a 36.8% fall. Since 2011, three out of five domestic airlines have ceased operations - Citylink, Fly540  Antrak. Even domestic airlines in current operation are doing so under severe constraints.

To address these challenges, NPP will:

a. reduce price of aviation fuel to match prices in region to make our airports more competitive  domestic airlines viable

b. review current baggage handling arrangements for domestic airlines

c. abolish 17.5% VAT on domestic air fares, and

d. encourage  support local airlines  entrepreneurs to set up strong private airlines that can fully utilize all nation's route
rights.

V. WATER INFRASTRUCTURE (WATER FOR ALL)

The NPP has a solid track record in provision of water to several communities across country. Between 2001 to 2008, NPP undertook major water system improvements in Cape Coast, Baafikrom, Koforidua, Kumasi, Kwanyarku, Ada, Sogakope, Accra,  Tamale. Unfortunately, today, a large number of Ghanaians still do not have access to potable water. Many hospitals do not have access to clean water on tap to support their daily operations.

The NPP will integrate management of water resources into our economic development activities in order to control properly their use. goal of NPP’s Water For All agenda is to ensure that every Ghanaian has access to potable water.

The NPP will achieve this by:

a. sinking at least 25,000 new boreholes  an additional 300 small town water supply systems in rural areas  small towns

b. supporting construction of dams in rural areas

c. undertaking major water systems (treatment plants  associated distribution systems)

d. ensuring that water sector gets investment that it needs to upgrade antiquated urban  rural water systems

e. developing water projects to ensure constant supply of potable water to all district, regional,  teaching hospitals, as well as educational institutions

f. regulating small scale mining to protect our water bodies, and

g. managing refuse collection  disposal in such a way as to reduce pollution of our water bodies.

VI. TACKLING FLOODING

Perennial flooding in country has led to regrettable loss of lives  property, as well as spread of diseases, including cholera. As a first step, NPP will construct storm drains in Accra  other cities  towns to deal with recurrent, devastating floods. As a long-term, permanent solution, we will establish a National Hydrology Authority (NHA), which will be responsible for developing long-term solutions to flood control  protection of our inland  sea coastlines.

The Authority shall plan, develop, maintain, protect  administer drainage, flood control measures, major dams  sea defence measures, including construction of major storm drains to reduce risk of flooding, constant dredging  desilting of our water ways  drains to ensure free flow of flood waters.

VII. INFORMATION COMMUNICATION  TECHNOLOGY (ICT)

The NPP will put ICT,  especially data science, including analytics, at centre of national development agenda,  also as part of a strategy to position country as a regional ICT hub.

NPP will achieve this by engaging in following activities:

* National Identification Scheme - we will register every resident in Ghana within first year of taking office

* Mainstream ICT in public sector:

- NPP will establish an integrated Data Warehouse of databases   key public institutions, using National Identification System as unique identifier for data items, and

- automate processes involved in accessing public services at both national  local government offices

* Improving telecommunications accessibility: NPP will facilitate nationwide access to mobile networks

* Create opportunities for entrepreneurship - we shall develop ICT Incubator Hubs in various regional capitals to create business opportunities in private sector. We recognise huge opportunities in investing in nascent but active app  software development ecosystem in Ghana. We plan, through Government procurement processes,  as part of our efforts to digitize access to social  public services, to invest in growing start-ups in area. We will invest, in partnership with private sector, in world standard Incubator Hubs, including workspaces  app development resources, to support sector

* Increase citizens' accessibility to data platforms by reducing tariffs on use of data for internet access, and

* Work with private sector to increase broadband bandwidth  speed of connections nationwide.

VIII. HOUSING: QUALITY, AFFORDABLE HOUSING FOR ALL

NPP’s vision is to use an appropriate mix of public policy  public/private investments to deliver quality, affordable social housing  private housing solutions that meet needs  financial capacity of ordinary Ghanaian.

We recognise dream of all Ghanaians to own a home, or failing that, at least to have decent rental accommodation. There are, however, three main constraints to housing Ghanaians which prevents many   buying, or being able to afford decent rental property.

These are:

a. a deficit which has created a backlog. country’s housing deficit is over 1,700,000 units. In addition to this huge deficit,
it is estimated that over 50% of Ghanaians live in sub-standard houses, depressed inner city dwellings, uncompleted houses, shops, kiosks  other unsuitable structures

b. undersupply of annual requirements of housing units. Whilst current supply stands at about 35 to 40,000 units per annum, actual need per annum is over 100,000 units, and

c. high cost of buying or renting a home

The NPP’s approach to helping Ghanaians meet their aspirations is to adopt a novel way to construction of homes,  instituting creative financing schemes. Our overall aims are to:

i. improve overall affordability  access to decent homes for all working Ghanaians  their families in modern communities

ii. develop housing units targeted at vulnerable  marginalized in society

iii. develop financing schemes to assist home buyers to acquire units

iv. improve quality of infrastructure in existing communities, and

v. use public policy to develop entire housing value-chain.

To provide a solution to supply-side constraints,  also financing demand-side, NPP will:

a. facilitate construction of high-density, quality social, low,  mid-income housing over short, medium  long term by:

* establishing land banks with infrastructure such as roads, drainage, water  power in place for development of affordable housing units on a public-private partnership (PPP)
basis

* offering tax incentives to local real estate developers  suppliers of building materials

* abolishing 5% VAT on real estate sales

* working with identifiable groups such as Trades Union Congress (TUC), Ghana National Association of Teachers (GNAT), National Association of Graduate Teachers(NAGRAT), Farmer’s Groups  other trade groups to facilitate construction of homes for their members through provision of appropriate financing guarantees

* implementing a national policy requiring every public building, including new homes built under all PPP arrangements, to install solar panels  water-harvesting technologies in order to reduce long term cost of ownership

* promoting  developing use of local building materials in construction of homes, and

b. fully implement section 103 (assignment of pension benefits for housing of workers) of National Pensions Act, 2008 (Act 766)

c. facilitate also development of an active mortgage market to expand mortgage loans to Ghanaians.

Chapter 7
NATURAL RESOURCES – LAND, FORESTRY  MINING
NEW PATRIOTIC PARTY
DEVELOPMENT IN FREEDOM

Introduction

The country is richly endowed with natural resources like fertle lands, lakes, rivers, forests, wildlife, fish  minerals which are vital for her development. However, Ghana’s natural resources, upon which so much of country’s economic activity  population’s livelihood depend, are being depleted at an alarming rate. More than 50 percent of original forest cover has been converted to agricultural land by clearing for perennial or annual cropping.

The NPP policy on forestry resources will seek to rehabilitate degraded forest reserve areas through planting of fast-growing indigenous  exotic species, conservation  sustainable use of natural resources.

I. REFORESTATION

a. Restoration of degraded areas  plantation
establishment

The NPP will target annually 30,000 hectares (ha) of degraded areas within  outside forest reserves for reforestation  plantation development, using fast growing indigenous  exotic species.

We will develop  support small scale community tree nurseries by:

i. establishing tree  plantain suckers in a minimum of 800 communities - averagely 4 communities per district - throughout country to supply seedlings for national reforestation  plantation development programmes, and

ii. procuring all seedlings for national plantation development programme  other reforestation efforts   these communities to generate income  create jobs.

b. Bamboo  Rattan plantations development

Bamboo  rattan resources in country constitute two largest non-timber forest products that have been identified to be suitable substitutes for timber. Currently, rattan is extensively used in furniture  handicraft industry, while bamboo is mainly used for construction. It is projected that 50,000 hectares of these plantations would be required to augment supplies   natural stands over next 25 years.

The NPP will support annual establishment of 1,000 hectares of bamboo  rattan plantations  will encourage, individuals  private sector involvement through provision of subsidized planting materials.

c. Support conservation of biodiversity  priority ecosystems

To facilitate conservation of our rich biodiversity, NPP will:

i. extend forestry conservation areas

ii. re-survey  demarcate forests with permanent concrete pillars, and

iii. support protection of remaining network of natural forest  biodiversity hotspots in country, to serve as gene banks for indigenous species  refuge areas for threatened, endemic  rare species.

d. Launch an Apiculture Forest Conservation Programme

Bee-hives will be made available to forest fringe communities, in next four years, as a forest protection mechanism  job creation incentive.

e. Ecotourism

The NPP will support enhancement of ecotourism industry in country to boost further its potential  contribution to economic
development.

f. Promote sustainable water resource management

Water is a dwindling resource  threat of water scarcity looms large. Trends indicate that Ghana would be a 'water stressed' state by 2025, with a potential supply gap of 50%. NPP will address this threat through a comprehensive protection of water catchment areas, principal mechanism being Clean Rivers Programme (CRP), which will be executed across country with participation of voluntary
organisations.

The goal of this programme is to maintain  improve quality of water resources within each river basin through an ongoing partnership with water stakeholders, local government, businesses  citizens.

The NPP will promote:

* replanting of trees along banks of all major water bodies  their tributaries, to reduce silting  other negative human activities adjacent to river banks

* dry season gardening within buffer zone, to protect river banks

* construction of canals and/or use of water pumping equipment to transport water to farms to ensure efficient water use

* procurement  supply to farmers of high quality seeds

* improved crop rotation  integrated nutrient  pest management, and

* conduct of regular assessments of effluents into our river bodies with view to controlling pollution

II. LAND

Several years of reform under Land Administration Project (LAP) have still not led to an efficient  well-functioning regime of titling, fixing of boundaries  ownership tracing. Further reform is needed, especially under NPP’s plan to use growth in activity in housing sector as a fulcrum for job creation.

In this direction, NPP will:

a. speed up land services  enhance accuracy of land certificates  records by investing in turning Lands Commission into a true digital organization, to reduce need for clerical or administrative paper shuffling  to free professional staff to focus on technical, policy  strategic land administration issues, where required. This will also ensure high standard of land data security

b. commit to ensuring that turnaround time for land registration is reduced to 30 working days

c. fully decentralize Lands Commission  land services to district level. NPP will reduce cost of land services, by making such services accessible electronically  at district levels

d. attract widest variety of new industrial enterprises to areas where it is most needed. We will reserve, zone  service lands at
strategic locations for development of industrial  business parks  enclaves across country in right places, without
damaging our green belt. They will be provided with integrated infrastructure, solar power systems  high speed broadband services. This will be allocated to priority export oriented, import substitution industries, light industries, technology companies  sales outlets to reduce their cost of connecting to utilities, as well as their operational cost.

e. support such businesses, by making such lands available at a considerably reduced cost to businesses that justify it

f. release publicly held lands for productive uses. NPP will free up surplus  underutilized lands, held by public departments for housing  commercial developments, to boost economic development  reduce housing deficit.

III. MINERAL RESOURCES

The NPP will be environmentally conscious in granting mining leases in order to ensure protection of our environment  its biodiversity, by pursuing following policies:

a. ensuring that mineral revenues are efficiently managed for benefit of Ghanaians. NPP will enact a consolidated Mineral Revenue Management Law, similar to Petroleum Revenue Management Act 2011 (Act 815), to guide use of mineral revenues in strategic sectors of our economy

b. mainstreaming critical strategic mineral feedstock into domestic economy, including low value minerals, to support economic value addition

c. facilitating revival of Anglo-gold Ashanti’s Obuasi mines  other mines as part of an overall strategy of protecting jobs  livelihoods of mining communities

d. supporting local mining capability, by introducing institutional arrangements that promote coherence between mining policies  Science Technology  Innovation (STI) programmes

e. encouraging development of shared infrastructure to integrate mining with community development

f. promoting mining value-addition through processing of minerals

g. ensuring a positive socio-economic impact of mining on local communities, through appropriate interventions for community development

h. increasing transparency in allocation of mineral rights  utilization of mineral revenues at national  community levels

i. ensuring that mining  logging activities are undertaken in an environmentally sustainable manner

j. ensuring that land restoration is undertaken after mining operations come to an end, and

k. fully decentralising Minerals Commission by establishing additional district offices of Commission, where appropriate.

IV. SMALL-SCALE MINING

It is NPP’s view that artisanal, small-scale mining sub-sector needs restructuring so that its activities can take place within guidelines set up under appropriate regulations.
This will enable small scale miners to work  earn their livelihoods in a regulated, secure,  lawful environment. By this process, environment, especially our water bodies, can be
protected  degraded land can be reclaimed through tree-planting  reforestation.

Chapter 8
SCIENCE, TECHNOLOGY, INNOVATION  ENVIRONMENT
NEW PATRIOTIC PARTY
DEVELOPMENT IN FREEDOM

The modern world economy is knowledge-based  technology-driven. Today, management of energy, agriculture, medicine  health, clean air, potable water, transportation, sanitation  conservation of natural resources is an example of sectors whose solutions are based on science  information technology. For country to make strides in its development, science, technology  innovation must be essential elements in all aspects of national development process.

Science  technology contributes less than 1% of Ghana’s GDP, compared to an average of 2.5% in rest of Africa. It is NPP’s intention to achieve at least 1.5% over next four years.
We are committed to promoting  leveraging efforts of scientific community to help transform economy into a production-based one.

To realise this, we will undertake initiatives listed under each of broad sectors of science  technology:

I. GOVERNANCE

The NPP intends to establish a Presidential Advisory Council for Science  Technology (PACST). Council will be an advisory group of nation’s leading scientists  engineers, who directly advise President on all matters  policies regarding science, technology  innovation,  who will also provide leadership in propagation of Science, Technology, Engineering  Mathematics (STEM) in our education system.

II. NPP WILL STIMULATE DEMAND FOR SCIENCE  TECHNOLOGY

The NPP will:

a. establish a merit-based research system to encourage scientific research for priority sectors of economy

b. strengthen collaboration between industry, universities,  research centres to promote commercialization of scientific research outputs

c. stimulate demand for science  technology   private sector

d. expand research  development capabilities of country through establishment of Regional Technology Parks, and

e. in collaboration with private sector  international financial institutions, establish a flagship system of Ghana Centres
of Excellence (GCEs) across country that networks all Higher Education Institutes (HEIs), including all other research organizations such as Council for Scientific  Industrial Research (CSIR)’s institutes  Cocoa Research Institute of Ghana (CRIG).

The GCEs will cover themes such as:

* biomedical engineering

* pharmaceutical technology  bioequivalence research

* crop improvements  seed technology

* environment  sanitation engineering

* energy engineering

* manufacturing equipment engineering

* agricultural technology

* food process engineering

* building technology, and

* electronics  electronic assembly,

At least 3 GCEs would be established by end of 2020.

III. EDUCATION

The NPP will:

a. support national policy of achieving 60:40 student ratio for Sciences as compared to Humanities by expanding STEM
scholarship schemes, and

b. provide incentives  support for accredited private tertiary institutions to establish schools  faculties of science and
technology.

IV. ENERGY

The NPP will explore use of various renewable energy alternatives, e.g. solar, wind, tidal waves  biomass, including biogas, wood gasification  biodiesel.

V. WASTE MANAGEMENT

The NPP will:

a. employ science & technology to identify most economic  efficient ways to recycle urban waste, and

b. build power plants that will use combustible domestic  industrial waste to generate electricity.

VI. AGRICULTURE  LAND-USE

The NPP will:

a. employ science  technology to map out soil structure  composition of country. With this data, country can increase agricultural production by using right mix of seeds  fertilizer at right locations

b. work with scientific community to identify optimal use of agrochemicals, in order to reverse and/or reduce their negative effects on land, water bodies, food  health of our citizens, and

c. continue research  development to enhance land-use systems, including water management techniques, sustainable forestry techniques  improved sanitation systems.

VII. WATER

The NPP will facilitate research  development in technologies for water desalination.

VIII. ENVIRONMENT

The NPP will:

i. update  strengthen many policies  programmes set up to manage environment, especially National Environmental Protection Programme (NEPP)  Environmental Action Plan (EAP), and

ii. work, with its international partners to access, in a more effective manner, $30 billion global fund available for climate change purposes.

Chapter 9
EDUCATION
NEW PATRIOTIC PARTY
DEVELOPMENT IN FREEDOM

I. OUR VISION

Education is critical in building of cohesive  prosperous Ghana on which we have set our eyes. Our children,  young people, must be equipped with knowledge, skills,  aptitudes that would enable them compete with best in world. Every country that has made rapid,  significant progress has placed education at heart of its development.

Today education sector in our country is in a sad state. Teachers who should be at heart of provision of education are deeply demoralized  feel unappreciated. payment of salaries  processing of their promotions  annual increments are always in
arrears. Examination malpractices have sadly become regular features of life in our country leading to undermining  loss of confidence in academic qualifications   our institutions.

We aim to shift structure  content of our education system   merely passing examinations to building character, nurturing values,  raising literate, confident,  engaged citizens who can think critically. When Nana Akufo-Addo announced commitment of NPP to delivery of free education for senior high schools, NDC promptly denounced it as impractical. As import of proposal, however, began to dawn on them, they began to back track  through massive propaganda created impression to people that they too were committed to free education step by step. But, as evidence of past four years clearly shows, commitment has only been skin-deep. Parents still face massive fees for education of their children. In spite of burdens on parents  guardians, our schools are starved of basic tools  equipment needed for teaching. Anything   simple common things like chalk to text books  laboratory equipment  computers have been in short supply. On top of all this has been most sustained evidence of contempt by a government towards teaching profession. Teachers at all levels,   primary to Universities, have been subjected to such denigration  contempt that morale has sunk to lowest ebb in nation’s history. It is no wonder, therefore, that even at a time of highest unemployment level in history, schools are still finding difficulty keeping their dedicated teachers.  it is no wonder that questions are being raised about quality of education in Ghana today.

The NPP believes that all hopes of Ghanaians for a bright future will come to naught unless country is able to resolve its education crisis. That is why NPP declares Education to be a MAJOR PRIORITY  commits itself to a BOLD, CREATIVE  VISIONARY  ALL-EMBRACING
PROGRAM for TRANSFORMATION OF EDUCATION
IN GHANA.

The core elements of Program shall be:

a. free education for all Ghanaian children up to senior high school, to ease burden on parents  guardians while encouraging them to assume their responsibility for social upbringing  parental control of their children

b. raise quality of education at primary  senior high school level, with emphasis on science  mathematics as fundamental building blocks for success in this age of technology  to ensure that first  second cycle schools lay solid foundations needed either for tertiary education or for preparations for early entry into work place

c. work with Universities to raise their standards to ranks of best among their peers in Africa  beyond to ensure not only that their products are equipped with all skills needed to build national economy, but also are able  motivated to take on challenge  opportunities for higher achievement in science  technology-led knowledge-driven global economy through innovation  creativity

d. Place Research  Innovation at heart of education in Ghana. Universities shall be expected to accord priority to research, especially in bio-medical, computer, agricultural  environmental sciences. We shall foster close integration between Universities  Ghana Academy of Arts  Sciences (GAAS)and other Research institutions  further create two new institutions:

* a Consultative Council of Researchers, Association of Ghanaian Industries, Ghana Chamber of Commerce, Representatives of Major Banks  Venture Capital Funds.
The Council shall be expected to help source for funding to take research finding   laboratory to market place

* in collaboration with GAAS, other research institutions  University, establish a Manufacturing Plant at Kwame Nkrumah University of Science  Technology for production of prototypes of inventions  creations of scientists  innovators in country. Plant will build prototypes to prove efficacy of innovations as decisive step in helping attract investment capital to support them

e. recognising that success of this Program hinges on ability to attract  retain best brains into teaching, NPP will signal a sea change in mindset of nation  especially of Government in its attitude towards Teaching Profession. We shall restore to our Teachers honour  respect they once held as source of enlightenment at all levels of society  ensure that Teaching becomes once again, a Profession of Choice for our ambitious youth

f. restore physical education  sports as an integral part of a program of wholesome education for a wholesome nation. A healthy mind in a healthy body has always been fundamental ethos of education. It ensures that all citizens are able to develop fully not only their latent mental faculties but their gifts of prowess. Unfortunately, physical education has been de-coupled   mainstream education in Ghana, thus depriving Ghanaian child opportunity to develop fully their natural talent for physical activity  sports. result is virtual collapse of sports in Ghana reflected in woeful performance at Olympics  other major international sports competitions. Sports in 21st century cannot be treated as a sideshow, for pleasure of a few. It is, in today’s world, a major factor in national development, in health of economy, in building social cohesion, in warding off temptations to anti-social behaviour  above all, in job creation. There are more jobs in sports today than in most of heavy industries on which world economy runs. There can be no better pathway to professional development than sports for most of vast army of young men  women who are unemployed in streets  exposed to all manner of temptations. To end this avoidable waste of natural talents, NPP will reintegrate physical education  recreation into mainstream education  ensure restoration of a rational program of sports organisation  competition   primary to University level.

As a sign of NPP’s commitment to get all children into school at right age, number of public kindergartens was increased by 5,729 schools during our time in government. In 2001/2 academic year when NPP begun its first term, there were 6,098 public kindergartens. By 2008/9 academic year, when NPP left office, there were 11,827 kindergartens, an increase of 93.94% in stock of kindergartens.

The NDC, so-called social democrats, have added only 2,001 public kindergartens in seven years leading up to 2014/15. A mere 14.4%. It is private sector that has risen to challenge  tried to bridge gap,  added 2,142 kindergartens since NDC came into power in 2009. It is no wonder NDC has sought to include private school buildings  enrolments in its compilation of education statistical reports in order to mask its incompetence  failures.

The NDC had tried same trick with primary schools, by including private primary schools  passing off figures as their performance in public schools. Enrolment of primary school pupils, at time of NPP leaving office (2008), had risen by nearly one million   2,113,749 to 3,041,895 (928,146), representing an increase of over 43%. Over last 7 years, NDC increased population by only 6.6%   3,041,895 to 3,244,997, a difference of only 203,103.

The NPP will tackle many problems that beset education in our country with seriousness  dedication required, because we know that an educated population is key to transforming our nation. We intend to focus on a balanced development of our children to make them competitive in global economy.

II. OUR PLAN

a. Kindergarten

We shall embark on a vigorous programme to ensure that kindergarten places are available for all four-year old children in country. training of early childhood  kindergarten teachers will be prioritized to reflect importance we attach to provision of equal opportunities for children   all backgrounds.

b. Primary

The NPP will reintroduce History of Ghana as a subject for primary schools. children of country need to know where we have come   to give them a sound grounding  instil confidence.

c. Secondary, Technical  Vocational Education

* Free SHS

The NPP will redefine basic education to include Senior High School (SHS), covering vocational, agricultural  technical schools,  make it available for free on a universal basis to all Ghanaians.

* Vocational  Skill training

The technical, vocational  skill training sectors have not received important attention they deserve. We acknowledge that it is technicians  those with vocational skills that will define workforce of an industrialized Ghana. We aim to dispel notion that this sector is for dropouts. We shall ensure that each region has two state-of-the-art technical  vocational institutions to demonstrate our commitment to sector. We shall upgrade  revamp existing technical  vocational institutions to ensure that training for world-class employable skills is conducted in world-class surroundings. Within first year, NPP will undertake a national audit of skills  competencies in a bid to align training opportunities  resources to respond to national  local human resource demands.

d. Management Of Schools

To ensure that standards are improved  maintained across pre-tertiary education, NPP government will strengthen  equip Inspectorate Board, as an independent body, to enable it carry out its inspection mandate. We will build an effective partnership with religious bodies, civic organizations  private sector in delivery of quality education. This partnership will also include areas of management, supervision  training of teachers in their units.

e. Teachers

* a well-trained, confident  contented teacher will be placed at heart of NPP’s delivery of quality education. views of teachers will be sought on education policy innovation  implementation. Their professional development  work environment needs will be treated with respect  we shall ensure that teachers’ salaries  allowances are paid regularly  on time. NPP will also focus on provision of incentives that will motivate teachers,  reward their hard work in classroom.

* NPP will collaborate with GNAT, NAGRAT,  other teaching associations to facilitate an affordable housing scheme for teachers.

* NPP will ensure that teachers who upgrade their qualifications  skills are promoted promptly  that their salary increases take immediate effect.

* NPP will ensure proper decentralization of teachers’ recruitment  other document processing activities  relieve teachers of frustrating, bureaucratic processing of documents at centre.

f. Science, Technology, Engineering  Mathematics (STEM) Education

The NPP will aggressively promote Science, Technology, Engineering  Mathematics (STEM) education across all levels of education system.

Mathematics has been identified as bedrock for progress  survival in modern world. Unfortunately, mathematics has proved to be a great stumbling block in education in country. We believe it is time to tackle this problem  break myth about fear of mathematics in our education system  in our country. An NPP government will leverage technology to popularize teaching  learning of Mathematics. Children in every part of country will have access to mathematics lessons delivered by first class teachers at highest level. We aim to demystify mathematics  turn country into a mathematics-friendly nation.

g. Teaching of French

Our neighbours to east, west  north speak French. Ghana is surrounded by French-speaking countries  yet we have a great deficit in speaking  understanding of French. Our neighbours, on other hand, invariably are conversant with English, thus putting us at a disadvantage in our dealings with them.

We shall put in place a programme for popularization  better teaching of French language in our schools.

h. Mission Schools

The NPP will strengthen participation of Missions in Mission-founded schools. We believe this will ensure return of discipline  moral upbringing to our schools.

i. Arabic Education

Arabic/Islamic Instructors in Zongos  parts of Northern Ghana were paid allowances under National Volunteer Service Programme by Kufuor-led NPP government. These were discontinued by NDC government. NPP will restore policy  additionally support Arabic/Islamic instructors with training  other incentives to motivate them to provide good training to our children. We will introduce Arabic as an optional language to be taught  examined at JHS  SHS levels.

j. Counselling  Guidance

There will be an intense focus on providing effective  professional guidance  counselling services to pupils, students  young people to facilitate their personal growth  development.

k. Sports

School sports will be back as an integral part of school activity to promote healthy mind in a healthy body requirement of education. NPP will provide sporting facilities  revive sporting competitions among schools not only for health purposes, but also as a career pathway for students, while fostering a spirit of competitiveness  teamwork.

l. Inclusive Education

The NPP will ensure that children with special needs are not left behind, but are assisted by teachers with requisite skills in differentiated teaching methods. Whenever possible, facilities will be provided to enable disabled children be integrated within regular schools.

m. ICT  Education

We shall improve facilities  curriculum for ICT education at all levels. We shall develop an online educational platform to host, stream,  share short videos of mini-lectures to classrooms or offices around country. We shall ensure that all teachers have ICT competence. Furthermore, NPP will, in collaboration with private sector, provide free WiFi coverage for senior secondary  tertiary institutions nationwide dedicated to learning, administration  enhancing capacity to do research.

The NPP will also introduce programming at Junior  Senior High Levels in order to expand capacity of our students in ICT  train them for job opportunities that sector offers.

n. Tertiary Education

The mission of traditional universities will be enhanced through provision of appropriate  adequate infrastructure  learning facilities to accommodate expansion  ensure conducive teaching  learning  research. In addition to Book  Research allowances for lecturers, NPP will establish a Research Fund to facilitate further research  innovation. We will also abolish payment of utility bills by students. We will also increase amount of loans under Student Loan Scheme  restructure to streamline its administration to enhance recovery of loans.

The NPP will place emphasis on continuous linkage of academia with industry  world of work to ensure curriculum relevance, thereby
reducing graduate unemployment. With conversion of Polytechnics into Technical Universities, an NPP government will reactivate original aim of linking Technical/Vocational institutions to Technical Universities. They will be assisted to refocus on technical education  will be at forefront of NPP’s One District, One Factory programme. NPP will encourage Colleges of Education to update their curricula to ensure they produce graduates that would teach well-equipped  critical thinking population we need to move country forward.

Under NPP, teacher trainee allowances will be fully restored. In addition, mechanisms will be put in place to ensure salaries of new teachers are promptly paid unlike current situation under NDC which has seen significant delays in their payment.

Chapter 10
HEALTH
NEW PATRIOTIC PARTY
DEVELOPMENT IN FREEDOM

The health system in country is critical for national development. vision of NPP is to see that right to health of all Ghanaians is guaranteed through an established health sector with sustainable ability to deliver affordable, equitable  easily accessible healthcare.

To realise this vision, NPP will expand health promotion programmes, scale up disease prevention strategies  improve access to curative  emergency services, through vigorous human resource  health infrastructure development  strengthening of National Health Insurance Scheme (NHIS).

Under leadership of President J.A. Kufuor, NPP improved health of Ghanaians by the:

i. introduction  implementation of NHIS  free maternal care

ii. implementation of Community Health Planning  Service concept

iii. establishment of National Ambulance Service

iv. expansion, equipping  increasing of number of health facilities

v. capacity building  increase of number of health professionals

vi. establishment of Ghana Postgraduate Medical College

vii. introduction of Regenerative Health  Nutrition through health promotion programmes

viii. improvement of provision of vaccine for preventable childhood diseases

ix. provision of highly subsidized anti-retroviral medicines for HIV/AIDS patients, and

x. introduction of sanitation programmes.

I. NPP PRIORITY AREAS

The NPP seeks to position Ghana to address comprehensively local, national  emerging global health concerns e.g. Zika  Ebola viruses  increasing incidence of non-communicable diseases.

The NPP broadly classifies our challenges into three priority areas.

* Global Health Concerns:

i. epidemic preparedness

ii. threat of epidemics - Ebola, Meningitis, Zika virus, Yellow Fever

iii. antimicrobial resistance, and

iv. non-communicable diseases

* National Health Emergencies:

i. health financing gap

ii. emergency preparedness to deal with acute injuries  disasters.

iii. poor sanitation - pervasive filth  resulting diseases

iv. teenage pregnancy  early marriage, and

v. high road traffic accidents

* National Health Concerns:

i. disparity in health resource allocation

ii. mental health

iii. neglected tropical diseases

iv. weak primary health care

v. decentralization of health system, and

vi. malaria & other communicable diseases e.g. TB

NPP’s resolve to strengthen health system will be guided by 7 principles as follows:

i. ensuring  mainstreaming a Health-in-All Policy approach with government agencies taking into account health implications of their work programmes

ii. One Health approach with health initiatives that mitigate exposure of risk by interaction of humans, animals  environment

iii. a Gender Sensitive  Gender Responsive Health System with a special focus on health needs of women  children will be ensured

iv. addressing health disparities in allocating resources  motivating health workers

v. increasing health financing

vi. expanding Primary Health Care with respect to reach, quality,  presence of skilled personnel, and

vii. focusing on social determinants of health

To ensure that Ghana is a healthy nation, NPP will:

II. RESCUE  RESTRUCTURE NATIONAL HEALTH INSURANCE SCHEME (NHIS)

The NHIS has collapsed over past 8 years under watch of NDC government. next NPP government will revive National Health Insurance Scheme to make it efficient, with capacity to finance health services on a timely basis in a bid to achieve universal health coverage for all Ghanaians by:

a. reviewing  restructuring sources of funding, as well as institutional arrangements for management of National Health Insurance Fund (NHIF)

b. increasing budgetary allocations to NHIS

c. directing  strictly ceding all funds raised through NHIA Levy into NHIF,  concentrating on activities that focus on quality patient treatment, medication,  care

d. utilising best in technology  health insurance management protocols to tackle waste, corruption,  insurance claim fraud under NHIS. This will include completely phasing out
the manual processing of claims (claims management) which currently stands at about 90%, tightly linking services  drugs to hospital attendance,  treatment to diagnosis

e. adopting a modernised strategy towards drugs procurement, including establishment of a preferred pharmacy network, incentivising appropriate prescriptions,  gradually shifting away   Central Medical Stores arrangement, and

f. emphasising preventive healthcare

III. ADDRESS SECTOR DISPARITIES

The NPP will address disparities in health sector by:

a. supporting manpower needs of MMDAs  overall healthcare sector by:

* investing in expansion  equipping of medical schools to train more medical doctors

* restoring trainee nurses’ allowances in full

* streamlining operations of  improving health- training institutions

* providing free specialist postgraduate training in our established postgraduate training institutions, and

* restoring  streamlining tax reliefs, abolished by NDC government, which facilitated purchase of vehicles by healthcare workers under Kufuor-led NPP government

b. strengthening emergency capacity  capability nationwide, including building an Accident  Emergency Centre in Takoradi,

c. strengthening National Ambulance Service  ensuring collaboration with NADMO

d. upgrading all existing District Hospitals where they exist,  where they do not, establishing one. NPP’s aim is for each District to have at least one hospital

e. strengthening flagship Community Health Planning Services (CHPS) programme in areas of:

* community participation

* infrastructure  financing

* quality service delivery by skilled health staff

* supervision  monitoring, and

* surveillance  disease control

f. establishing, in collaboration with private sector, wellness clinics at all levels of healthcare

g. working with private sector to establish a world class Research & Laboratory Centre within a responsive National Laboratory System

h. using a mix of policy  incentives to encourage private sector investments in development of healthcare facilities, including hospitals  related services

i. implementing a National Epidemic Response System

j. amending health laws on administration, management  financing to create an environment conducive for decentralisation

k. strengthening pharmaceutical industry  services to ensure:

* policies on procurement  prescription guarantee availability of effective drugs, whilst ensuring drugs are used appropriately, and

* improvement of drug supply chain by expanding rapidly local production  ensuring quality affordable drugs are available

l. working with private sector to establish a national bioequivalence laboratory

m. coordinating with all government agencies to ensure that improved sanitation  waste management are pillars of their operations

n. providing legislative, administrative  financial support for implementation of Mental Health Bill, control of non-communicable  neglected tropical diseases, organ transplantation  assisted reproduction

o. improving health facilities  providing Centres of Excellence through partnerships with private sector.

p. working with private sector to establish trauma centres within hospitals along main highways, in order to facilitate medical treatment of citizens in cases of accidents

q. making Ghana destination of choice for health tourism in ECOWAS region

r. making accessible, affordable  of high quality continuum of care a woman experiences through fertility period to delivery, including health of children

s. promoting good nutrition  physical activity as a shared national value

t. implementing a comprehensive plan for safe disposal of biomedical waste

u. strengthening health research institutions

v. incorporating traditional medicine in health delivery system

w. prioritising training  skills development of health staff

x. developing an inter-sectorial action plan to reduce incidence of teenage pregnancy  early marriage

y. improving health data quality to inform local, district  national planning

z. improving efficiency to ensure limited resources are used prudently,  making sure existing hospitals  clinics are adequately supplied with basic drugs, gloves, syringes, oxygen,  anti-snake serum, many of which are not even available in some teaching hospitals.

IV. POLICY ON CANCER

NPP recognises increasing incidence of cancers (childhood cancers, breast cancer, cervical cancer, prostate  other cancers) as a national problem.

In this regard, NPP will establish centres at all levels of our healthcare delivery system for screening, diagnosis, early detection  prevention of these cancers,  this will be paid for under restructured  revitalised NHIS.

Chapter 11
SOCIAL DEVELOPMENT
NEW PATRIOTIC PARTY
DEVELOPMENT IN FREEDOM

I. BUILDING A FAIR  INCLUSIVE SOCIETY

The NPP aims to create a society of fair opportunities for all Ghanaians. Building on far-reaching social intervention policies of Kufuor-led NPP administration, such as National Youth Employment Programme (NYEP), Capitation Grant, National Health Insurance Scheme (NHIS), Free Maternal Care, Microfinance  Small Loan Centre (MASLOC), Mass Cocoa Spraying Exercise, Metro Mass Transit Transport Service, Ghana School Feeding Programme (GSFP)  Livelihood Empowerment Against Poverty Programme (LEAP), NPP will help create a fair  inclusive society, which ensures that all citizens share in country’s wealth  prosperity.
This will be achieved by establishing a well-funded, functioning welfare system which addresses needs of weak, marginalised, vulnerable  socially excluded.

The NPP will:

a. amend Disability Act to bring it into line with UN Convention on Disability

b. pass appropriate Legislative Instruments for implementation of Mental Health Act, 2012 (Act 846)  Disability Act, 2006 (Act 715)

c. staff  properly resource National Council on Persons with Disability in partnership with civil society organisations

d. implement inclusive education for persons with disability

e. implement equal employment opportunity policies for appointment into public offices for persons living with disability

f. ensure National Council on Persons with Disability (NCPD) is decentralized to regional level in order to coordinate activities of various federations

g. enforce section 18 of Disability Act that provides for free education for persons with disability

h. implement 3% increase in Common Fund disbursements to persons with disability, announced in 2012, but which remains
unimplemented

i. ensure that portion of DACF meant for persons with disability are disbursed through decentralized district  regional
offices of NCPD

j. modernise, improve  resource special training school for persons with disability, to train them on technical  skill training
programmes, and

k. encourage private institutions to reserve a quota of jobs that can be filled by persons with disability.

II. LIVELIHOOD EMPOWERMENT AGAINST POVERTY PROGRAMME (LEAP):

Under NPP, original design of LEAP was not to create lifelong dependents, but to help households "LEAP" out of poverty. In that
direction, cash-transfer component was to be complemented with training in income-generating activities, with view to equipping households with skills  resources they need to help themselves out of poverty.

NPP plans to refocus programme, which has become a blatant source of political patronage, by:

a. adopting effective, accurate means-testing to target, identify  enrol properly beneficiary households

b. establishing a consistent  regular monthly disbursement plan, and

c. targeting female-headed households, where intervention may have greatest positive impact.

III. GHANA SCHOOL FEEDING PROGRAMME (GSFP) WILL BE ENHANCED BY:

a. instituting measures to reduce administrative cost to barest minimum

b. rationalising  improving monitoring processes under GSFP

c. training caterers on hygienic preparation of nutritious food

d. providing adequate funding for monitoring

e. ensuring regular payments are made to caterers, and

f. stimulating local agricultural growth, by requiring caterers to buy  use foodstuff grown locally   local farmers.

IV. MAINSTREAM AGING, RETIREMENT  PENSIONS INTO NATIONAL PLANNING  SERVICE DELIVERY

The NPP will develop  implement policies for aged  mainstream aging issues into national development frameworks  poverty eradication strategies.

Currently, financial viability of Social Security  National Insurance Trust (SSNIT) is in question. World Bank, in its 2016 Report on Governance of SSNIT, states that "the actuarial valuation shows that Fund becomes cashflow negative in 2019  all assets would be used up by 2031. At this point, benefits will have to match inflows  will lead to very significant cuts in benefits for current pensioners."

While new Pensions Act, 2008 (Act 766) was a marked improvement on then existing law  made provisions for extending coverage to vast number of workers not covered under basic national social security by way of voluntary Tier 3 schemes, reality on ground is that a substantial segment of workers in informal sectors of economy do not have any form of retirement income programme covering them.

A major reason for absence of coverage for majority of workers in informal economy is that current operational  administrative practices  systems in retirement income industry have not developed innovative approaches  systems to facilitate extension of coverage to this critical segment of our working population. Key among such challenges is absence of effective contribution collection systems adaptable to these informal wage earners.

Given this background information on state of retirement income programmes in country, NPP will adopt as a vital element of its poverty eradication  social support programme for vulnerable in our society, a retirement income scheme for two significant demographic segments of our society, namely:

a. farmers (including ancillary farm hands) in our major cash crop agricultural sectors like cocoa, coffee, sheanuts, palm oil, pineapple  cashew nuts; and

b. members of small scale business associations included in umbrella organizations such as GPRTU/PROTOA, Association of Small Scale Enterprises (ASSE), mechanics (fitters)  similar associations across country.

Furthermore, NPP will:

a. ensure that funds of National Pensions Regulatory Authority (NPRA) are applied solely for development of pensions industry

b. fully implement section 103 (assignment of pension benefits for housing of workers) of National Pensions Act, 2008 (Act 766)

c. pay all outstanding contributions to pension funds, including Tier 2 contributions, for public sector workers

d. use appropriate information technology platform to decentralize  automate pension payments,  establish desks in each District Assembly for this purpose

e. provide aged with a Freedom Pass to enable them ride for free on all public transportation, and

f. undertake a comprehensive review of SSNIT’s investments  costs to ensure its financial sustainability.

IV. WOMEN’S EMPOWERMENT & CHILDREN’S RIGHTS

The NPP, under Kufuor-led NPP government, in demonstration of importance of women  children in society, set up Ghana’s first Ministry for Women  Children’s Affairs.

Today, NPP remains committed to gender equality  children’s rights  will work assiduously to achieve following:

a. appointment of women to at least 30% of available public office positions

b. setting aside 50% of MASLOC funds for female applicants

c. reintroduce  enforce administrative directive on reservation of 30% of poverty alleviation/credit funds of MMDA’s to service womens’ enterprises

d. reducing Kayayei (Head Porters) phenomenon by:

* improving economy of their districts of origin to curb migration

* providing alternate life skills training  seed capital, as well as partnering private sector, NGOs  charities to provide temporary hostel facilities

* we will work with District Assemblies to exempt Kayayei   market tolls  taxes currently imposed on them, and

* improving their access to education  health care.

In addition, NPP will pursue in area of women  children’s welfare following:

a. implementing fully Domestic Violence, Human Trafficking  Disability Acts  ensuring that other relevant pieces of legislation are implemented in full

b. continue implementing policies that increased enrolment  retention in schools, like school feeding programme  capitation grant. Special emphasis will also be placed on proper diagnosis  treatment of children with learning disabilities like dyslexia  other special needs. Their education will be mainstreamed as far as practicable with full implementation of inclusive education policy

c. introducing a District Integrated Social Services programme for children, families  vulnerable adults to consolidate relevant health, education,  justice systems, as well as all social protection programmes

d. strengthening  enforcing regulations,  introducing national minimum standards for residential children’s homes, and

e. strengthening regulations  reforming adoption  foster care regime  providing incentives for fostering at-risk children.

Chapter 12
GOVERNANCE, CORRUPTION  PUBLIC ACCOUNTABILITY
NEW PATRIOTIC PARTY
DEVELOPMENT IN FREEDOM

I. GOVERNANCE

The fundamental requirement for sustainable development is good governance. NPP is irrevocably committed to establishment of a solid, efficient machinery for good governance, comprising accountable government  respect for rule of law  human rights.

To realise this, NPP government will deepen culture of rule of law by:

a. upholding  promoting separation of powers. NPP government will make adequate provision to secure independence of Judiciary  will help to strengthen institutional capacity of Parliament, and

b. promoting  instilling within state security agencies an enhanced ethic  culture of respect for rights  freedoms of citizens

The NPP will also deepen political participation by:

a. appointing women to at least 30% of available public office positions

b. bringing back People’s Assemblies to encourage citizens to participate in government, and

c. ensuring that citizens  public bodies are fully aware of their respective duties  rights in delivery of public service; and
empowering citizens to demand quality of public service to which they are entitled.

II. CURRENT STATE OF PUBLIC ACCOUNTABILITY

Ghana, a well-endowed country, has been brought to its knees  has been reduced to borrowing  begging   foreign creditors  donors to finance even its most mundane development needs. Corruption is what has brought this shame upon us all. Corruption holds back economic growth, increases cost of doing business, reduces revenue to state, leads to capital flight  inflates cost of running government. It results in a loss of legitimacy  respect for legally-constituted authority. Corruption demoralises honest people  fills them with uncertainty, mistrust  fear. It stifles initiative  creativity  dampens motivation. It undermines merit system of rewards, appointments  success  it encourages mediocrity, laziness  incompetence.

Under NDC administration, corruption has become widespread, heralding entry of phrase - CREATE, LOOT  SHARE - into Ghanaian lexicon, introduced by Supreme Court in a ruling on a corruption case.

The corruption under John Mahama’s NDC Government is exemplified by:

a. rampant contract price inflation

b. abuse of procurement processes, with sole sourcing most abused process

c. public accountability reduced to highlighting government projects, without accompanying monetary cost

d. anti-corruption institutions being underfunded

e. revelations of stealing  looting not investigated with potential culprits going unpunished,  finding shelter in Office of President in an open display of impunity

f. payments of dubious judgment debts  questionable settlements, and

g. flagrant nepotism  cronyism.

The Mahama-led NDC government pays lip service to fight against corruption. There is no real commitment to fighting corruption as Attorney General’s Office either refuses to prosecute or where there have been prosecutions, does so shoddily.

We cannot continue along this path if we are to build a secure, peaceful  prosperous society for ourselves  posterity. NPP  its leadership commit to fighting corruption with renewed vigour, honesty  integrity. We intend to ensure that public funds are spent on their intended purposes  people of Ghana get value for money in public expenditures. NPP will fight corruption head-on through preventive, detective, corrective  punitive actions.

Our anti-corruption policy will be based on three key pillars: institutional reform, legislative reform,  attitudinal change/public education.

Some of specific actions NPP will undertake under these pillars are:

III. INSTITUTIONAL REFORM

a. Office of Special Prosecutor

The Commission on Human Rights  Administrative Justice (CHRAJ)  Economic  Organised Crime Office (EOCO) require permission of Attorney General to prosecute. monopoly of prosecutorial authority by an Attorney-General, who is hired  fired by President, has been singled out by governance experts as one of key factors that stand in way of using law enforcement  prosecution as a credible tool in fight against corruption. Such institutional bottle-necks impede fight against corruption.

To this end, we intend to establish, by an Act of Parliament, an Office of Special Prosecutor, who will be independent of Executive, to investigate  prosecute certain categories of cases  allegations of corruption  other criminal wrongdoing, including those involving alleged violations of Public Procurement Act  cases implicating political officeholders  politicians.

b. Strengthening Institutions of State

NPP will enhance accountability in governance by promoting effective separation of powers. Adequate provision to secure independence of Judiciary will be made  we will help to strengthen institutional capacity of Parliament to solidify parliamentary oversight of Executive.

Furthermore, we shall require Attorney General to report to Parliament annually on potential liability of State arising out of claims against State. We shall support  provide all institutions whose mandates cover anti-corruption with enhanced financial resources to recruit, train, engage  retain a large number of technical personnel to investigate  educate against corruption.

c. Assets Declaration Regime

An NPP government will implement an effective Assets Declaration Regime by fostering a working environment for asset declaration that includes following elements:

* President shall, within 14 days, forward a list of appointments, made in pursuant of Chapter 24 of Constitution, to Auditor General

* effective monitoring of asset declaration, by amending law to require Auditor General to publish periodically list of all persons appointed under Chapter 24 of Constitution, who have declared or defaulted

* amend law relating to asset declaration to provide for sanctions which may include forfeiture of appointment, and

* Parliament will be called upon to amend law to provide for public disclosure of asset declarations.

d. Code of Conduct

As part of fight against corruption, NPP government shall enact, popularize  enforce a comprehensive code of conduct for public officials so as to give full meaning  effect to provisions of Article 284 of Constitution.

e. Statutory funds

The NPP will establish an automatic mechanism for transfer of statutory funds to designated agencies such as Ghana Education Trust Fund (GETFund), District Assemblies Common Fund (DACF)  NHIS as stipulated by law.

IV. LEGISLATIVE  OTHER REFORMS

The agenda of legislative reform will generally review legal, regulatory  institutional framework for anti-corruption.

In order to adopt legislative measures that will operationalize relevant articles on corruption in UN Convention Against Corruption, NPP will do following:

a. amend relevant sections of Criminal Offences Act, 1960 (Act 29), particularly sections 3, 151,  239-257, to make corruption a felony rather than a misdemeanour

b. reform laws to set time limits within which an appointing authority must fill any vacancy or confirm a person acting in that office where that institution has a watchdog role

c. ensure passage of Right to Information bill if present Parliament delays in doing so

d. introduce legislation to improve prevention, detection, reporting, investigations  prosecution

e. propose a law for establishment of Office of Special Prosecutor

f. strengthen institutions like Parliament, Judiciary,  other state institutions,  resource them sufficiently to be effective

g. ensure strict enforcement of Public Procurement Act, 2003 (Act 663)

h. ensure transparency by establishing a transaction price database, which will be periodically reviewed to conform to market trends

i. resource Auditor General’s office to set up a Procurement Audit Unit to conduct value for money audits with view to detecting  prosecuting corrupt practices

j. bring to an end prevailing regime of impunity, where people found to have stolen or fraudulently benefited   public funds are merely requested by Attorney General to refund same on their own terms or are sheltered at Office of President,  also ensure implementation of recommendations of Auditor General  Public Accounts Committee (PAC) of Parliament.

V. ATTITUDINAL CHANGE/PUBLIC EDUCATION

The NPP intends to resource National Commission on Civic Education (NCCE) to provide public education  sensitisation on negative effects of corruption, as well as to initiate  sustain a national conversation on values that should shape transformation of country. This should strengthen citizen’s resolve to resist, condemn  report corruption  demand accountability.

Finally, NPP in government will sponsor establishment of an interactive website for public reporting of corrupt practices in accordance with Whistle Blower’s Act, 2006 (Act 720).

Chapter 13
LOCAL GOVERNMENT
NEW PATRIOTIC PARTY
DEVELOPMENT IN FREEDOM

The NPP is committed to bringing governance to doorsteps of people. We will focus on effective  efficient decentralization through greater grassroots participation, better planning  improved service delivery in local communities.
Over past eight years, NDC, under John Mahama, has failed to add to financial resources of District Assemblies. Rather, his
government has instituted a practice by which a large portion of DACF is deducted at source for spending by Ministry. Only 33.3% of allocated DACF is actually transferred for direct utilization by Metropolitan, Municipal  District Assemblies (MMDAs). This weakens
the effective functioning of local government.
The last NPP government improved human resource capacity  increased budgetary support to MMDAs. District Assemblies Common Fund was increased   5.0 to 7.5% of total national revenue. A District Development Fund was also established with a seed fund of US$25 million. Legal backing was given to Institute of Local Government Studies as key capacity-building institution, responsible for generating requisite personnel to man local governments.

An NPP government will undertake following measures to ensure that local governance  decentralization are enhanced:

I. POLITICAL DECENTRALISATION

NPP will:

a. oversee direct election of Metropolitan, Municipal  District Chief Executives (MMDCEs) within 24 months of election into office, to coincide with next District Assembly elections in
2019

b. strengthen sub-structures of MMDAs through capacity building  adequate resource allocation

c. strengthen role of traditional authorities within local government system, and

d. improve allowances paid to assembly members.

II. LOCAL GOVERNMENT SERVICE  CAPACITY BUILDING

NPP will:

a. review Local Government Service regime  practice, to ensure that local level action is not stifled by top-heavy bureaucratic institutions, especially in recruitment  procurement, against background of a seeming scheme of re-centralization under recently established Local Government Service, and

b. upgrade Tamale campus of Institute of Local Government Service (ILGS) into a modern state-of the-art institute to train local government practitioners  staff in northern Ghana.

III. FISCAL DECENTRALIZATION

NPP will ensure that fiscal decentralization is fully implemented through following initiatives;

a. abolishing current practice of central Government manipulation of DACF through procurement process

b. decentralizing  equipping Land Valuation Board (LVB) to provide direct technical support on property valuation to MMDAs for enhanced revenue mobilization, and

c. ensuring speedy enactment of Municipal Finance Bill, initiated by Kufuor-led NPP administration, into law. This law will provide space to MMDAs to access funds   capital market for rapid socio economic development  partner private sector to provide job opportunities to local people.

IV. SANITATION MANAGEMENT

The NPP will ensure consolidation of all existing national sanitation policies, plans  programmes into a Comprehensive National Sanitation
Programme  Action Plan.

The NPP will establish a National Sanitation Fund to fund this Action Plan.

Sources of Fund shall include:

a. allocations   Consolidated Fund

b. contributions   sanitation related industries, and

c. sanitation related fines

The NPP will also promote recycling of refuse through use of incentive packages.

Chapter 14
SECURITY
NEW PATRIOTIC PARTY
DEVELOPMENT IN FREEDOM

Ghanaians are becoming increasingly concerned about their security, due to increasing levels of crime  lawlessness under Mahama-led NDC government. Today, Ghanaians do not feel safe. Mahama-led NDC government has failed people of Ghana in terms of security of country  of its citizens. Our existing laws are largely not enforced,  when they are, they are done selectively, often with much interference   Executive.

The NPP Government will secure peace  security for all Ghanaians. Under NPP Government, Ghanaians will feel safe on streets  in their homes. Ghanaians will go about their daily business in secure knowledge that their persons, properties  lives are safe under an NPP Government. NPP believes that strict enforcement of our existing laws by our security agencies, without selectivity, will go a long way to sanitize our nation, assuage fears of citizenry  dramatically transform our society.

In this regard, next NPP government will ensure that all our security personnel are properly-trained, properly-resourced,  provided with incentives to enable them discharge professionally their duties  obligations fairly  effectively without any interference   executive branch of government in order to make country a safe place for all our citizens.

The NPP will ensure that our security personnel are also adequately prepared to deal with emerging threats of terrorism  cybercrime, which will be another major priority of our government.

I. IMPROVING LIVING CONDITIONS OF SECURITY SERVICES

The NPP recognises that conditions, under which majority of our security services live, have become unacceptable.   inadequate spaces to poor sanitation, many of their barracks have not seen upgrades for decades. As part of our overall commitment to improving living conditions of our security personnel, NPP will roll out a National Barracks Regeneration Programme that will invest in rehabilitating  upgrading their living quarters across country.

II. POLICE SERVICE

The NPP will resource our police to continue to maintain law  order  protect lives  property with following measures:

a. review  restructure recruitment into our police service to stamp out fraud  cronyism that have been introduced into this process by Mahama-led NDC government

b. continue to recruit additional personnel, with increased recruitment of women, into police service, as we work towards target of meeting U.N. ratio of 1:500 police to civilians

c. ensure that our marine police unit is expanded  resourced,  that it works in tandem with Navy to deal effectively with protecting our offshore oil  gas installations,  tackling illegal activities such as pair trawling  drug trafficking in our territorial waters

d. provide police with modern communication  policing equipment

e. encourage security awareness of various communities through neighbourhood watch schemes

f. develop a comprehensive policy to enhance Police’s capacity to tackle cyber-crimes  cyber security issues

g. invigorate highway patrols to combat highway robberies  reduce motor accidents on our roads

h. improve current police visibility arrangements by strengthening community policing

i. build two new police hospitals at Sunyani  Bolgatanga to serve health needs of police personnel

j. build 2 new police training schools

k. harmonise  standardise police training across country

l. improve  resource all police training institutions, including command college at Winneba, and

m. improve training of CID personnel both locally  internationally.

III. ARMED FORCES

The NPP will continue to provide Armed Forces with adequate  modern resources to enable them perform their core function of defending territorial integrity of Ghana. NPP will also enable them to meet their peacekeeping obligations, provide humanitarian services, including medical evacuation  to participate in national disaster relief, when they occur.

We constructed second phase,  we will complete third phase of 37 Military Hospital project, as well as upgrade its equipment to meet modern medical challenges. We will also construct a new military hospital in Tamale to service health needs of military personnel  their families in northern sector of country.

In addition, NPP will:

a. improve institutions under military, including training schools for other ranks,  Military Academy  Training Schools (MATS), Armed Forces Recruitment Centre, Ghana Armed Forces Command  Staff College  Kofi Annan International Peacekeeping Centre

b. protect military lands   encroachment, and

c. continue local  foreign training for Armed Forces personnel

IV. UN PEACEKEEPING MISSION

The NPP, under President Kufuor, in keeping with our tradition of enhancing welfare of military personnel, increased troop contribution allowance normally paid to soldiers   US$16 to US$27 a day, an increase of about 69%. President Mills increased it by 11% to US$30. President Mahama
increased it by just US$1 to US$31, being a mere 3% increase, in all a total of 14% increase over 8 years of NDC government.

After announcing US$1 increase, it was rejected by military personnel,  under pressure, Mahama was forced to increase it by another US$4 to US$35. NPP commits to adjusting upwards allowances in line with new increases by UN,  will ensure that personnel, who serve in UN Peacekeeping Missions are paid at their duty post.

V. PRISONS SERVCE

The NPP will take immediate steps to decongest our prisons,  introduce a system of separate dedicated prisons for remand  convicted inmates to serve as proper correction homes. We will submit a bill to Parliament to reform our prisons.

Areas of reform will include:

a. pre-trial detention

b. prison management

c. sentencing reform, including non-custodial sentences

d. social integration, and

e. health facilities

We will also invest in overall welfare of Prisons Service personnel, including its civilian officers, by:

a. enhancing training for Service personnel

b. providing modern  strategic equipment to make service personnel more efficient

c. offering competitive remuneration to enable Service attract best personnel

d. improving standards, quality,  number of accommodation for Service

e. improving healthcare at Prisons for prisoners, prison officers  civilian employees, and

f. building two Prison Service hospitals, one each in Southern  Northern sectors of country.

VI. FIRE SERVCE

NPP’s policy is to provide each district with a Fire Service station where none exists. Where there is one, NPP will upgrade it as required to meet minimum standards expected of a modern, well-equipped fire station.

Similar to other services, NPP will invest in overall welfare of men  women of Fire Service, by:

a. enhancing training for Service personnel

b. providing modern  strategic equipment to make them more efficient. In particular, for all locations that make them a necessity, NPP will provide equipment for use on highrise buildings in
fire incidents, and

c. offering competitive remuneration to enable Service attract best personnel.

VII. IMMIGRATION SERVCE

As principal service at our entry points, Immigration Service is critical to security of our borders  in prevention of cross-border  international crime. Indeed, it is at forefront of regional effort to combat growing terrorism. Equally important, it is an agent for offering that traditional Ghanaian welcome that country is known for to tourists  visitors to our country.

In recognition of their multiple roles,  also as part of NPP’s aim to grow rapidly our tourism  hospitality sector, we shall pay particular attention to training  incentivisation of  personnel of Immigration Service. In particular, we will offer extensive training in specialist areas in growing areas of crime detection  prevention, customer service relations,  trends in global cross-border crimes  anti-terrorism tactics. We will also provide modern  strategic equipment to make them more efficient, as well as offering competitive remuneration to enable Service attract best personnel.

VIII. NARCOTICS  ILLICIT DRUG TRADE

Increased use  trade in illegal drugs are major threats to our nation  our youth. It is also an issue of national security, as Ghana has become a major transit point to extent that VVIP Lounge at Kotoka International Airport, Accra has been used to facilitate drug trafficking under Mahama-led NDC government.

The NPP will introduce a robust  comprehensive anti-narcotic drug  anti-organised crime policy with severe sanctions  penalties to serve as deterrence for potential offenders.

Our overall plan will concentrate on six (6) key areas: education, prevention, collaboration, detection, sanctions  rehabilitation. We will educate youth about hazards of narcotic drugs  organized crime. Working with our international partners, we will institute measures to prevent hard drugs   being imported into country,  also eliminate country’s reputation as a trans-shipment point. We will strengthen country’s detection institutions  systems.

IX. SMALL ARMS

The NPP will take all necessary measures to curb proliferation of small arms  light weapons,  enforce laws on their illegal possession, manufacturing  trade. To improve safety  security of our citizens,  to combat use of small arms in conflicts, we will take relevant steps to control effectively ease of availability of small arms in country. We will support Small Arms  Light Weapons Board to streamline manufacture, importation, sale  distribution of small arms in country.

To achieve this objective, we will take following measures:

a. regulate small arms transfers  sales activities

b. destroy surplus  confiscated weapons

c. curb smuggling of small arms  light weapons into country, and

d. ensure that protocol on small arms  light weapons is incorporated into our domestic law.


Chapter 15
FOREIGN AFFAIRS
NEW PATRIOTIC PARTY
DEVELOPMENT IN FREEDOM

Since independence, Ghana has been held in high esteem in comity of nations, thanks to its consistent show of leadership in international matters, especially within West African region  on African continent. Our foreign policy will be one of principal agents of Ghana’s socioeconomic resurgence. NPP will improve on efficiency  effectiveness of our foreign missions. We will redirect their emphasis to search for economic opportunities with view to opening markets for Ghanaian goods, while attracting foreign investments into Ghanaian economy.

To achieve this, NPP will also review existing policies to take into account new world order with respect to developments like Brexit, emergence of China  other BRICS nations – Brazil, Russia, India  South Africa.

I. ECONOMIC DIPLOMACY

The NPP will prioritise development of economic opportunities in our foreign policy, by opening up markets abroad for Ghanaian goods  services  attracting foreign investments. An important task of our diplomatic missions will be to link our businessmen with foreign counterparts in strategic alliances  partnerships to develop private sector,  to market country as an attractive destination for foreign investment. Ministry will facilitate linkages between Ambassadors  High
Commissioners  MMDCEs with view of maximising investment  trade opportunities for local authorities.

II. DEMOCRACY  FOREIGN AFFAIRS

Under Kufuor-led NPP government, Ghana was seen as poster boy of African rising narrative. Unfortunately, country has lost this image. Our stature in comity of nations has considerably diminished under watch of Mahama-led NDC government. NPP will restore our lost image. NPP is proud of its democratic heritage. We will support democracy  growing trend towards democratisation in all parts of world, especially in Africa. NPP will support strengthening of democratic governance, rule of law, civil rights  political freedoms everywhere. We remain firmly committed to our membership of ECOWAS, African Union (AU), NEPAD, La Francophonie, Commonwealth  UN. These organisations champion cause of democracy, good governance, human rights  rule of law. Ghana, under NPP, will improve her stake  role in a strong  vibrant regional market  enhance our role in activities of AU.

III. MULTILATERALISM IN FOREIGN AFFAIRS

The NPP believes strongly that Ghana can defend its national interests,  maintain its sovereign independence, yet take decisions with its more powerful friends, partners  allies without deferring to them.

IV. GHANA  ECOWAS

Recognising advantages of an expanded market for intra-regional trade  economic co-operation, NPP will work towards realisation of all objectives of ECOWAS, including working for rapid establishment of an ECOWAS regional market. A strong  vibrant ECOWAS will not only be a stimulus for our economic development, but will also serve as a springboard for realisation of an African Economic Community. NPP government will encourage all groupings within region to harmonise their objectives  operations with a view to facilitating rapidly achievement of a united  strong West Africa as a basis for a united  strong Africa.

V. GHANA  AFRICAN UNION (AU)

The NPP is fully committed to objectives of AU. We will do all in our power to make Union work more efficiently  purposefully for advancement of African continent  its peoples, as stated in Agenda 2063. We will support genuine aspirations of all African countries towards realisation of Africa’s developmental objectives. NPP will play an active part in effort to create African Continental Free Trade Area (ACFTA).

VI. GHANA  COMMONWEALTH

Ghana’s ties to governments  peoples of Commonwealth are based on shared democratic values, history, language  common interests. We will not waver in upholding tenets of Commonwealth of Nations. Our continued membership of Commonwealth will help foster greater international understanding, internalise best practices,  maximise our benefits through economic  technical cooperation  enhance international peace  security.

VII. GHANA  INTERNATIONAL ORGANISATION OF LA FRANCOPHONIE

The NPP will strengthen our ties with other members of International Organisation of La Francophonie as a means of broadening our global reach in promoting our culture, tourism, trade  investment relations.

VIII. GHANA  UNITED NATIONS ORGANIZATION

Ghana will continue to play an active role in UN  its specialised agencies as well as other affiliated agencies like ILO, FAO, UNICEF, World Bank  IMF,  continue our commitment to attaining Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs).

IX. GHANAIANS LIVING ABROAD

A significant aspect of our foreign policy will be promotion of welfare of Ghanaians living in diaspora. NPP will endeavour to avail all our nationals living abroad due access to all provisions of laws that affect them. NPP will continue to welcome back to country Ghanaians living in diaspora, as well as people of African descent  make them feel at home. We will develop close social  cultural ties with our kith  kin to our mutual benefit. granting of dual citizenship has now restored basic rights of Ghanaians living abroad, who, for one reason or another, had to adopt citizenship of their host countries,  thereby lost their Ghanaian citizenship. Ghanaians living abroad are a critical part of skills base that is needed for economic transformation. Rather than treating Ghanaians in diaspora as second-class citizens, NPP would put in place a policy framework that would encourage those, who may or may not have acquired other citizenships to bring their skills back home to assist in development of our country. We shall expand further opportunities that will allow Ghanaians living abroad to participate fully in our national discourse  benefit fully   opportunities this nation has to offer.

In furtherance of this, we will help in implementation of Representation of People’s Law, 1992 (PNDCL 284), as amended (alias ROPAL). Diaspora Affairs Bureau will also be moved   Foreign Ministry to Office of President to coordinate more effectively all matters affecting Ghanaians in diaspora.

Chapter 16
YOUTH  SPORTS
NEW PATRIOTIC PARTY
DEVELOPMENT IN FREEDOM

I. YOUTH AGENDA

The youth constitute our major source of human capital for transformational agenda of country. Hence, all efforts should be made to employ their talents  skills for sustained growth of economy. However, thanks to toxic mixture of mismanagement, incompetence,  corruption, Ghanaian youth are, today, more than ever despondent.

Youth unemployment has reached crisis levels. Millions are unemployed,  have no access to capital to start businesses on their own. NYEP (later reincarnated as GYEEDA,  now operating as YEA), established to bring relief, has collapsed under weight of unprecedented corruption. It is obvious that it is youth who will drive discovery of new technologies, innovation  growth in future. NPP’s national youth policy is designed to help shape our youth for this role through developing leadership skills, quality education, entrepreneurship, job skills, creative skills  sports. We will create an enabling environment to build capacity of our youth to take on more active roles in our country’s future  its development.

In pursuant of this, we will focus on following:

a. setting up a Youth Development Authority (YDA) to harmonise  coordinate all government-sponsored youth initiatives  policies

b. establishing a Youth Enterprises Fund (YEF) that will provide funding  business development services for businesses owned by young entrepreneurs, especially start-ups

c. developing industrial parks in all regions targeting young Ghanaians, who start or wish to start small businesses, to provide them with access to workspaces, equipment  basic services, including electricity  water

d. implementing our proposed policy that ensures businesses established by young entrepreneurs under Youth Enterprise Fund (YEF) participate in bidding for 30% of required 70% of Government-funded contracts to be sourced   entities owned by women, persons with disability  young persons

e. offering tax incentives to young entrepreneurs to encourage them to initiate start-ups

f. introducing tax credits  other incentives for companies that hire young graduates   tertiary institutions

g. concentrating on ICT training to create job avenues locally  offshore for our youth, and

h. instituting a Buy-Local policy for Government agencies with regards to ICT to ensure that applications  software are procured   local ICT firms.

II. SPORTS DEVELOPMENT

Nothing unites Ghanaians more than sports. development of sports will be a key plank in galvanising our youth to appreciate nationhood  patriotism. Sports also has potential of creating thousands of jobs, contributing significantly to our GDP  boosting image of Ghana internationally.

The country is currently faced with a myriad of challenges in all areas of sports. Sports administration under NDC, for past eight years, now evokes images of chaos, confusion, massive fraud, endemic corruption  a culture of impunity. There is also inadequate investment in sports, resulting in low motivation  morale of sports men  women in country. absence of an adequate legal framework for sports development  promotion also hinders development of sports. lack of a maintenance culture has led to deterioration of sports infrastructure,  neglect of school sports  other sporting disciplines have resulted in fallen standards.

Having built two new stadia in Tamale  Sekondi,  reconstructed Accra, Kumasi  El Wak stadia, NPP has a proven track-record in sports infrastructure development  we will continue with our vision of maintaining  building sports infrastructure. We will focus on building cordial relationships with various sporting associations, whether autonomous or semi-autonomous,  ensure increased  dedicated funding for sports. We will also create an enabling environment that will provide right incentives for Public Private Partnerships (PPPs) in sports. Under NPP, sports development  promotion will be prioritised.

The next NPP government will pursue development of sports sector by:

a. modernising sports through provision of right legal framework, by enacting comprehensive Sports Bill initiated under President Kufuor

b. ensuring that District Assemblies fully participate in sports development  promotion

c. developing, in partnership with private sector, Youth Development & Sports Centres in all Regions. Each centre will house a fully-equipped library, ICT hub, social hall, multi-purpose pitches  courts

d. completing construction of University of Ghana stadium started by Kufuor-led NPP government

e. pursuing vision of providing modern multi-sport stadia for regions currently without one, namely Brong Ahafo, Eastern,
Upper East, Upper West  Volta

f. establishing a special unit at Ministry to develop  promote sporting disciplines other than football,  to concentrate on revival of school sports

g. putting in place an effective maintenance regime in partnership with private sector

h. encouraging private sector to provide funding for sports through establishment of incentive packages, as well creating a Sports Fund to support financing of sports

i. establishing three sports colleges in collaboration with private sector

j. developing a Youth in Sports module to support young sportsmen  women  to create job opportunities for them

k. investing in a special Women-In-Sports programme to help unearth  support female athletes  sports talents across country, and

l. awarding scholarships to promising young athletes so they can develop in best of environments.

Chapter 17
TOURISM, CULTURE  CREATIVE ARTS
NEW PATRIOTIC PARTY
DEVELOPMENT IN FREEDOM

I. TOURISM

Ghana possesses an extensive array of tourist attractions that include UN Heritage Sites, Forts  Castles, ancient mosques, slave trade artefacts, indigenous craft villages  various wildlife sanctuaries. With tourism sector underdeveloped, however, we have been unable to exploit huge potential that our tourist attractions offer in creating wealth  generating jobs, nor in marketing country as an exciting destination for leisure, conference, sports, health  educational tourism.

The NPP government will focus on transforming country into a major Meeting, Incentive, Conference, & Exhibition (MICE) centre, as well as on expanding tourism sector, through investment, innovation, pursuit of service excellence  meaningful partnerships. This will enable tourism to become a major revenue-generating sector that provides safe, memorable  enjoyable experience for tourists.

To achieve this, NPP will:

a. aggressively develop our tourist sites to bring them to world-class standards, complete with requisite amenities  facilities

b. pursue a deliberate marketing programme to promote our unique historical sites, flora  fauna, waterfalls  other cultural artefacts

c. take staffing of these tourist sites  our hospitality industry as a whole seriously. To improve professionalism in sector, we will partner with private sector to set up a state-of-the-art hospitality teaching facility, with an operational hotel, classrooms, kitchens, library,  dormitories

d. encourage local communities to take ownership  be invested in sustainability of tourist attractions in their localities

The NPP will champion a revenue-sharing programme to inject 5% of tourism revenues   fees of well-developed tourist attractions into local community projects

e. transform Ghana Tourist Authority into a modern, efficient research  marketing institution with necessary technical resources  funds to help project image of Ghana as a globally-recognized tourism brand

f. give priority to high-impact facilities that have potential to draw more patrons  increase traffic to tourist venues, by providing incentives for private sector investors to invest in new tourism facilities  upgrade existing ones, such as beach resorts, quality hotels, safaris, heritage villages  fun parks

g. promote domestic tourism, by making it an aggressive plank of our tourism strategy with a marketing drive centred on entrenching a tourism culture among Ghanaians

h. reactivate  resource Ghana Museums  Monuments Board to function effectively as a repository of both our cultural  historical records

i. to conserve properly our natural tourist attractions, pursue an ecotourism policy that enables us make these sites available whilst protecting ecosystem, and

j. invest in Tourism IT as an enabler, to improve knowledge  sharing of information about tourism opportunities in country.

II. CULTURE

Culture is very foundation of society  a country’s strength is built on its culture. Ghana has one of richest  most vibrant cultures in world. Our foods, our languages, our music, our fabrics, rich, colourful kente cloth, smock  Adinkra symbols are some of distinctive symbols of what identifies us  gives us confidence in ourselves.

The NPP will give Arts  Culture Industry requisite attention  incentives to flourish  to also create jobs  wealth for our people. Culture Policy, developed  adopted under Kufuor government, will be reviewed  actively implemented to give our culture pride of place in our national development. We will build a detailed inventory of all our cultural assets, so nation has a database of these assets. This inventory will include all of Ghana’s tangible assets, like Larabanga mosque,  intangible cultural assets like rites of passage  values  belief systems, which are in danger of disappearing completely with aging traditional custodians.

The Copyright Act 2005 (Act 690), among other provisions, provides for protection of Adinkra symbols  older Kente designs as expression of folklore. NPP will ensure that provisions regarding protection of Kente  Adinkra designs are strictly enforced against illicit exploitation by foreign interests, to enable country maximize revenue through proper marketing of these heirlooms.

Government is by far largest procurer of goods  services in country. An NPP government will use its purchasing power to promote Made-in-Ghana goods  services.

III. CREATIVE ARTS

With Creative Arts Sector being perennially under-resourced, it has not blossomed enough to ensure country’s creative arts professionals are able to make a comfortable living off their work. sector has potential to contribute greatly to GDP growth. As such, NPP will focus on supporting sector to enable it realize its full potential for generating wealth for its practitioners, create jobs  grow economy.

To make available funds to modernize  develop sector, we will establish a Creative Arts Fund. Nothing demoralizes a creative arts professional more than when intellectual property is stolen  misused with no consequences for copyright thief. NPP will collaborate with Chief Justice to create a Division of High Court, focusing on Creative Arts to deal with all matters relating to intellectual property rights, complete with a dedicated enforcement unit.

To provide an effective interface with Government  other key stakeholders, NPP will establish a Creative Arts Council to coordinate  harmonize various interests  fragmented associations into a well-functioning body to protect interests of members. We will educate public on copyright laws  provide necessary framework for payment of appropriate royalties for creative works. NPP will collaborate with private sector interests to acquire technology  equipment needed to log creative works, in order to determine true  deserved royalties.

In order to stimulate an interest in arts in young people, we will promote regional  district literature, music, dance  drama competitions, particularly in schools  colleges. We will pursue construction of modern large seating theatres in every regional capital except Accra, beginning with Takoradi, Tamale  Kumasi, as well as setting up an additional Copyright Office in Tamale to cater for northern sector in addition to existing ones in Accra  Kumasi.

Chapter 18
CHIEFTAINCY, RELIGIOUS AFFAIRS  CIVIL SOCIETY
NEW PATRIOTIC PARTY
DEVELOPMENT IN FREEDOM

I. CHIEFTAINCY

The NPP will give due deference to Chiefs as embodiment of history  traditions of our people  will support Chieftaincy institution to preserve, sustain  employ traditional  cultural values, as well as practices that accelerate wealth creation  social harmony for total development.
Recognising indispensable role of Chiefs in local government  their existence as symbols of traditional authority, we will support our Chiefs to provide leadership  focus for local  district development. In this regard, NPP will ensure regular  prompt release of Consolidated Funds disbursements due to Chiefs, to enable them carry out their functions.

The NPP will also:

a. ensure prompt payment of royalties due Chiefs, Queen Mothers  Traditional Councils

b. provide government support to institution of Chieftaincy in performance of their duties, their evolution  further modernization

c. support National House of Chiefs to codify  systematize traditional laws  culture

d. involve Chiefs, Queen Mothers  Traditional Authorities in afforestation  greening of Ghana with support of Forestry Commission

e. foster a collaboration of Government agencies  traditional leaders that will centre on protection of water bodies  conservation of environment

f. forge a new  formal collaboration between Chiefs, Queen Mothers  Traditional Authorities with NADMO, so that relief assistance can be better managed in our local communities during natural disasters  other emergencies, and

g. consult traditional authorities on appointments to local government institutions.

II. RELIGIOUS AFFAIRS

The NPP recognizes special role religious organisations play in development of nation. Religious bodies have been in partnership with Ghanaian people in provision of education, health facilities  moral upbringing for nearly two hundred years. NPP will continue to engage actively religious organizations as leading moral-cultural institutions that have a key role in moulding character  conduct of our citizens. We appreciate value of involvement of religious organisations in management of faith-based schools  we will explore possibility of enhancing their involvement.

We also acknowledge important role of mission hospitals in our healthcare system, especially in rural areas. NPP will therefore ensure that religious bodies in health sector receive their NHIS payments promptly  commits to payments of existing debts expeditiously.

III. CIVIL SOCIETY  CHARITY ORGANISATIONS

Civil Society in Ghana plays a significant role in governance  development. Right   before independence, voluntary groups, associations  organisations were involved in all sectors of Ghanaian life. An NPP government will launch a new era of cooperation  collaboration with civil society to improve governance  enhance well-being of Ghanaians. We will work to ensure that community develops  thrives.

The NPP will create enabling legislative  economic environment for philanthropy to blossom  promote a new era of giving, knowing that a prosperous Ghana makes it easier for individuals  organisations to support civil society. We will concentrate on interventions that will unleash potential of all, including vulnerable, weak  excluded, particularly women, children  PLWDs. We will protect their rights  eradicate or reform harmful, inhumane  inimical cultural  traditional practices.

CONCLUSION

The solutions we have set out in this document have been well-considered. They are a response to real problems faced by Ghanaian people as a result of mismanagement, incompetence  corruption of Mahama-led NDC government. This Manifesto is our commitment to people of Ghana. It is a social contract between ourselves  people of Ghana. We aim to restore hope  to get country back to working again  relieve hardships of our people. plans we have set out are for long term sustainable development of our country. With help of Almighty God, NPP will build in Ghana most people friendly  most business friendly economy in Africa, which will create prosperity for great majority of our people,  thereby secure stability of our society  peace of nation.

We have an excellent team of men  women who are ready  eager to serve our beloved Ghana. We have a well-thought out programme,  we have a track record of good performance in government. So support us  together, let’s get Ghana working again.

The future is bright.

God bless Ghana, God bless us all.
NEW PATRIOTIC PARTY
DEVELOPMENT IN FREEDOM